Lecture 1

Puer Aeternus is the name of a god of antiquity. The words themselves
come from Ovid’s Metamorphoses and are there applied to the child-god
in the Eleusinian mysteries. Ovid speaks of the child-god Iacchus,
addressing him as the puer aeternus and praising him in his role in
these mysteries. In later times, the child-god was identified with
Dionysus and the god Eros. He is the divine youth who is born in the
night in this typical mother-cult mystery of Eleusis and who is a kind
of redeemer. He is a god of vegetation and resurrection, the god of
divine youth, but we also use it sometimes to indicate a certain type of
young man who has an outstanding mother complex and who
therefore behaves in certain typical ways which I would like to
characterize as follows.
In general, the man who identified with the archetype of the puer
aeternus remains too long in adolescent psychology; that is, all those
characteristics that are normal in youth of seventeen or eighteen are
continued into later life, coupled in the most cases with too great a
dependence on the mother. The two typical disturbances of a man who
has an outstanding mother complex are, as Jung points out,
homosexuality and Don Juanism. In the case of the former. The
beloved object, with the result that sex cannot be experienced with
another woman. That would make her a rival of the mother, and
therefore sexual needs are satisfied only with a member of the same
sex. Generally, such men lack masculinity and seek that in a partner.
In Don Juanism there is another typical form of this same
disturbance. In this case, the image of the mother—the image of the
perfect woman who will give everything to a man and who is without
any shortcomings,—is sought in every woman. He is looking for a
1

Marie-Louise von Franz

mother goddess, so that each time he is fascinated by a woman he has
later to discover that she is an ordinary human being. Once he has
been intimate with her the whole fascination vanishes and he turns
away disappointed, only to project the image anew onto one woman
after another. He eternally longs for the maternal woman who will
enfold him in her arms and satisfy his every need. This is often
accompanied by the romantic attitude of the adolescent. Generally
great difficulty is experienced in adaptation to the social situation and,
in some cases, there is a kind of false individualism, namely that, being
something special, one has no need to adapt, for that would be
impossible for such a hidden genius, and so on. In addition there is an
arrogant attitude toward other people due to both an inferiority
complex and false feelings of superiority. Such people also usually
have great difficulty in finding the right kind of job, for whatever they
find is never quite right or quite what they wanted. There is always “a
hair in the soup.” The woman is also never quite the right woman; she
is nice as a girlfriend, but —. There is always a “but” which prevents
marriage or any kind of definite commitment.
This all leads to a form of neurosis which H.G. Baynes has described
as the “provisional life,” that is, the strange attitude and feeling that
one is not yet in real life.1 For the time being one is doing this or that,
but whether it is a woman or a job it is not yet what is really wanted,
and there is always the fantasy that sometime in the future the real
thing will come about. If this attitude is prolonged, it means a constant
inner refusal to commit oneself to the moment. With this there is often,
to a smaller or greater extent, a savior complex, or a Messiah complex,
with the secret thought that one day one will be able to save the world;
the last word in philosophy, or religion, or politics, or art, or something
else, will be found. This can go so far to be a typical pathological
megalomania, or there may be minor traces of it in the idea that one’s
time has not yet come. The one thing dreaded throughout by such a
type of man is to be bound to anything whatever. There is a terrific fear
of being the singular human being that one is. There is always the fear
of being caught in a situation from which it may be impossible to slip
out again. Every just-so situation is hell. At the same time, there is a
highly symbolic fascination for dangerous sports—particularly flying
and mountaineering—so as the get as high as possible, the symbolism

1

See “The Provisional Life,’ in Analytical Psychology and the English Mind.
2

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

being to get away from reality, from the earth, from ordinary life. If this
type of complex is very pronounced, many such men die young in
airplane crashes and mountaineering accidents.
They generally do not like sports which require patience and long
training, for the puer aeternus, in the negative sense of the word, is
usually very impatient by disposition, so that such sports do not
appeal to them. I know a young man, a classical example of the puer
aeternus, who did a tremendous amount of mountaineering but so
much hated carrying a rucksack that he preferred to train himself even
to sleep in the rain or snow and wrap himself up in a silk raincoat and,
with a kind of Yoga breathing, was able to sleep out of doors. He also
trained himself to go practically without food, simply in order not to
have to carry any weight. He roamed about for years all over the
mountains of Europe and other continents, sleeping under trees or in
snow. In a way, he led a very heroic existence, just in order to not be
bound to go to a hut or carry a rucksack. You might say that this was
symbolic, for such a young man in real life does not want to be
burdened with any kind of weight. The one thing he absolutely refuses
is responsibility for anything, or to carry the weight of a situation.
In general, the positive quality of such youths is a certain kind of
spirituality which comes from relatively close contact with the
unconscious. Many have the charm of youth and the stirring quality of
of a drink of champagne. Pueri aeterni are generally very agreeable to
talk to. They usually have interesting things to talk about and have an
invigorating effect upon one. They do not like conventional situations;
they ask deep questions and go straight for the truth. Usually they are
searching for genuine religion, a search that is typical for people in
their late teens. Generally the youthful charm of the puer aeternus is
prolonged through the later stages in life, but there is another type of
puer who does not display the charm of eternal youth, nor does the
archetype of the divine youth shine through him. On the contrary, he
lives in a continual sleepy daze, and that too is a typical adolescent
characteristic: the sleepy, undisciplined, long-legged youth who merely
hangs around, his mind wandering indiscriminately, so that sometimes
one feels inclined to pour a bucket of cold water over his head. The
sleepy daze is only an outer aspect, however, and if you can penetrate
it, you will find a lively fantasy life is being cherished within.
The above is a short summary of the main features of certain young
men who are caught up in the mother complex, and, with it, identified
with the archetype of the puer. I have given a mainly negative picture
3

Marie-Louise von Franz

of these people because that is what they look like if viewed
superficially, but, as you will see, we have not explained what is really
the matter. The question to which my lecture is directed is why the
problem of this type, of the mother-bound young man, has become so
pronounced in our time. As you know, homosexuality—I do not think
Don Juanism is so widespread—is increasing more and more; even
teenagers are involved. It seems to me that the problem of the puer
aeternus is becoming increasingly actual. Undoubtedly mothers have
always tried to keep their sons in the nest, and some sons have always
had difficulty in getting free and have rather preferred to continue to
enjoy the pleasures of the nest. But one does not quite see why just
now this in-itself natural problem should become such a time-problem.
I think that is the important and deeper question we have to put to to
ourselves because the rest is more or less self-evident. A man who has
a mother complex will always have to contend with his tendencies
toward becoming a puer aeternus. You might ask what cure there is? If a
man has a mother complex that is something which happened to him,
he did not do that to himself, but supposing he discovers that fact one
day, what can he do about it?
In Symbols of Transformation Jung spoke of one cure—work—and
having said that he hesitated for just a minute and thought, “Is this
really as simple as all that? Is that just the one cure? Can I put it that
way?” But work is the one disagreeable word which no puer aeternus
likes to hear, and Jung came to the conclusion that it was the right
answer. My experience also has been that if a man pulls out of this
kind of youthful neurosis, then it is through work. There are, however,
some misunderstandings in this connection, for the puer aeternus can
work, as can all primitives or people with a weak ego complex, when
fascinated or in a state of great enthusiasm. Then he can work twentyfour hours at a stretch or even longer, until he breaks down, but what
he cannot do is to work on a dreary, rainy, morning when work is
boring and one has to kick oneself into it; that is the one thing the puer
aeternus usually cannot manage and will use any kind of excuse to
avoid. And a analysis of puer aeternus sooner or later always comes up
against this problem, and is only when the ego has become sufficiently
strengthened that the problem can be overcome and there is the
possibility of sticking to the work. Naturally, though I have not found
that it is much good just preaching to people that they should work,
for they simply get angry and walk off.
As far as I have seen, the unconscious generally tries to produce a
4

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

compromise, namely, to indicate the direction in which there might be
some enthusiasm or where the psychological energy would flow
naturally, for it is of course easier to train oneself to work in a direction
supported by one’s instinct. That is not quite so hard as working
completely uphill in opposition to your own flow of energy. Therefore
it usually is advisable to wait a while and find out where the natural
flow of interest and energy lies and then try to get the man to work
there. But in every field of work there always comes the time when
routine must be faced. All work, even creative, contains a certain
amount of boring routine, and that is where the puer aeternus escapes
and comes to the conclusion again that “this is not it!” In such
moments, if one is supported by the unconscious, there are generally
dreams which show that one should push on through the obstacle and
if that succeeds then the battle is won.
In order to get into the deeper background of the whole problem, I
want first to interpret The Little Prince by Antoine de Saint-Exupéry
because it throws much light on this situation. This man, as you know,
died during the last war in an airplane crash and he displays all the
typical features of the puer aeternus, which, however, does not alter the
fact that he was a great writer and poet. His life is difficult to trace,
which in itself is typical, for when you try to follow the biography you
can only collect very few facts here and there because, as is already
clear, the puer aeternus never quite touches the earth. He never quite
commits himself to any mundane situation but just hovers over the
earth, touching it from time to time, alighting here and there, so that
one has to follow such traces as there may be.
Saint-Exupéry came from an old aristocratic French family and grew
up in a beautiful country house with its traditional atmosphere. He
chose to become a professional aviator and acted for time as a pilot for
the Compagine Aeropostale, which ran a service between Europe and
South America. In about 1929, he flew over the line in Toulouse-DakarBeunos Aires, and was also a collaborator in establishing new lines in
South America. Later he was for a considerable time in command of a
completely isolated airdrome in the North African desert—Cape Julie.
His main duty there was to rescue pilots who had crashed, from death
in the desert or falling into hands of rebel Arab tribes. That was the
kind of life such a man would like, and Saint-Exupéry preferred this
isolated desert post to any other. In 1939, at the beginning of the war,
he fought for France as a captain in the Air Force, and after the collapse
of France he had intended to escape to Egypt, but for technical reasons
5

Marie-Louise von Franz

that plan had to be abandoned. He was then demobilized and went to
New York, where he finished his book Flight to Arras.
When later the Allies landed in Africa he wanted to return to the Air
Force, and though he was refused on account of his age, he used every
conceivable ruse and trick so as to be able to fly again. In July 1944,
having left Algiers, with his plane on a reconnaissance flight over
France, he disappeared without leaving any trace either of his plane or
of himself. Later—some time after the war had ended—a young
German reported that he had probably been shot down over the sea by
a German Fokker-Wolff plane. Out of a group of seven planes, one man
said that a French machine had been shot down over the
Mediterranean, and from the indications given it would have been
Saint-Exupéry’s.
Saint-Exupéry’s marriage was a very unhappy one. His wife seems
to have been a very temperamental and difficult woman, and he
usually did not stay with her for more than a week or two. When he
was not allowed to fly he always became depressed and irritable and
would walk up and down in his flat from morning till evening,
desperate and irritated, but when he could fly he became his normal
self again and felt all right. When he had to stay on the ground and be
with his wife, or remain in some other situation, he fell back into these
bad moods, so he always tried to get back into flying. His other books
show how much he was concerned with present-day problems and
with the Weltanschauung of our time. Those of you who have read them
will have noticed that like many French people, especially those of the
French nobility, he has quite a bit of Nazi psychology. The French are
Franks, something one forgets because they hate the Germans so
much, but the upper layers of society are often of German stock which
immigrated into France are not so very long ago. From a historical
point of view and therefore especially in military circles and among the
nobility, they have quite an affinity with Prussian mentality.
Undeniably this comes out in figures in Saint-Exupéry’s novels: for
instance, in Riviere, where he tries to outline the Führer type, the cold
man who sends his young flyers to their death for a higher purpose.
This is just a part of the local make-up in his milieu and not really
relevant for his deeper problem, which I will not answer now but will
try to find the answer to it with you.
One of his most popular works, as you know, is The Little Prince,
which had a tremendous success and which many people make their
Bible and worship. But if you talk to them about it, they generally
6

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

adopt a slightly defiant attitude, interesting that they think it is a
marvelous book. I have wondered about this defiant attitude a lot and
think the only one explanation can be that even those who like it so
very much have a small question mark in their mind, and there is one
question which I think one is allowed to put—even to its worshippers
—and that is about the slightly sentimental style, sentimental touch
which although it causes a certain malaise, does not detract from its
value in other ways, even if one enjoys the book very much.
Question: How would you account for this sentimental touch?
In general, where there is sentimentality there is also a certain
amount of brutality. Goering was a wonderful example, for without a
qualm he could sign the death sentence for three hundred people, but
if one of his birds died, then that fat old man would cry. He was a
classic example! Cold brutality is very often covered up by
sentimentality. If you think figures of Riviere and of the Sheikh in
Saint-Exupéry’s books, there you see this cold masculine brutality at
work.
When we have interpreted The Little Prince, we shall take some case
material where this will become very clear, namely, in the shadow
problem of the puer aeternus. That is where there is usually a very cold,
brutal man somewhere in the background, which compensates the too
unreal attitude of consciousness and which the puer aeternus cannot
assimilate, or at least only involuntary. For example, in the Don Juan
archetype that cold brutality comes out every time he leaves the
woman. This brutality, or the cold realistic attitude, very often appears
also in matters to do with money. As he does not want to adapt
socially, or take on some regular job and work, but yet must get money
somehow, the puer aeternus generally achieves his purpose behind his
own back, with his left hand, so to speak. He gets the money, God
knows from where, and in rather mean ways. If you touch that
unconscious shadow problem, you get a complex—an emotional
reaction.
Remark: Many of the aspects which you ascribe to the puer aeternus could
also be ascribed to the psychopath. What distinction do you make between the
two?
Quite a lot. But I would not say that the above is typical for the
psychopath. For instance, the age I shall bring afterward, a schizoid
borderline type is another variety. My experience is the beside the puer
aeternus there is the man who is either the psychopath or the schizoid
or the hysteric, or just slightly neurotic, depending on the individual
7

Marie-Louise von Franz

case and what additional form the problem takes on. Let’s say
somebody has a religious problem. That is a problem in itself, but in
addition, the person can be a psychopath, a schizoid, or hysterical
about it. The same applies to the problem of homosexuality, which can
be combined with, or free form, other neurotic features and can be
linked with the time-problem more or less closely. It seems to me to be
a more and more paramount problem. Jung has a very interesting idea
about that. He said that perhaps it is an unconscious compensation for
overpopulation, namely, that Nature pushes this tendency in order to
compensate overpopulation—so that a certain number of people
refrain from producing children. Nature might possibly employ such a
ruse, and overpopulation is just now out greatest problem. In former
times there were no statistics, so it is difficult to prove anything by
statistics here. We only know that homosexuality is now tremendously
widespread. My father, who was an officer in the regular army is
Austria and who spoke openly about such things, said that in his time
it was not a problem in the army and that there were very few cases,
while nowadays, as you know, among airmen particularly, it is a very
real problem and very general.
Remark: In America we find that about two-thirds of all the young
patients are homosexual, at least that is my experience.
Statistics themselves present a great difficulty. For instance
Freudians see latent homosexuality present everywhere and would
include among semi- or latent homosexuals many cases which I would
not. Also, in my own experience, a large proportion of what appears to
be homosexuality among women is rather a mother-daughter affair.
Such women act out the mother-goddess Kore myth, the DemeterPersephone myth, and if you go into their fantasies you find that
usually one of them is seeking rebirth through the other. It is not so
much a lesbian affair in itself, for if you ask a woman who has
transference to another woman to let her fantasy run on about what
she would like to have happen, there generally appears a strange
rebirth fantasy, a rebirth through the other woman, due to extreme
infantility. For instance, in the case Marguerite Sechehaye cites in her
book Symbolic Realization, which some of you may have read, the
patient Renée has tremendous tie to the analyst Sechehaye, and the
transference takes on the form which a Freudian would call lesbian,
but if you examine it closely it is a mother-daughter relationship, a
rebirth affair. Thus, statistics do not give a reliable picture, for it
depends on how the man who draws them up classifies them and
8

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

whether he would count such a case homosexual or not.
In general, we might simply say that both homosexuality and the
puer aeternus problem are spreading and that, I think, has to do with
certain religious present-day problems. I do not want to anticipate here
but would prefer to take the material from a typical case and find out
what the problem is at bottom.
Remark: This seems to be the same concept that Strakker had following the
Second World War, as far as the American Army is concerned, where the
mother complex resulted in an inability to function appropriately in military
service. Hundreds of thousands of young men had to be refused for the service
because they could not adapt to the requirements. They all were “mother’s
sons.”
Yes, we have also been asked, officials, at the Jung Institute whether
we could not send somebody to do something about the fact that most
airmen do not want to fly after they have reached the age of thirty.
That is a great problem, for it takes considerable time to train a man as
a really good pilot. One could say that it would be just about when
they are thirty and have become really good and experienced pilots
that then, generally, there comes a crisis. There a sudden neurotic fears,
or they do not want to continue, they crash due to their resistance. The
problem has reached such proportions that they have even thought of
asking the assistance of psychologists and wanted to know if we could
do something! The Swiss have the same trouble. Swissair cannot get
enough pilots because there are not enough applicants, for there are
large numbers, but the very severe tests prove that about forty to fifty
per cent of the young men who want to become pilots are neurotic
mother-complex people whom it would not be safe to employ. Since
they take to flying on account of their neurotic condition, they would
either be unreliable or would give up on flying fairly soon. Therefore
the Swiss do extensive testing and refuse the men on they would have
the same problem as the Americans; that is, the men would work till
thirty and then leave, just when all the time and money had been spent
on their training. So this is a real problem of our time, which goes right
into very practical issues.
I know someone who conducts tests for the Swiss pilots, and we
have arranged that he shall try to make a word-association test with all
the puer aeternus material in it and find out how the complex-reaction
comes out on that, but unfortunately this has not yet been worked out;
in a few years I may be able to tell you about it. Perhaps we shall get at
the pilots’ problem in that way though it seems to me the picture is
9

Marie-Louise von Franz

already fairly clear, namely, that the mother complex induces such men
to choose a symbolic job—they want to stay up in the air and not touch
the earth. It is the symbolic impulse and on account of it all the
difficulties arise. In fact, Americans should be quite happy that so
many of their pilots want to give up flying at the age of thirty. It shows
that at that age, many of them pull out of the puer aeternus attitude;
although it is bad for the Army, it is a good sign. I would never take on
the job of trying to persuade those men that they should go on flying,
because their not wanting to do so might be a healthy symptom. If
anybody could ever give me really useful information on the point, I
would like to know what the Russians do about it, how it works with
them. I have no idea about that.
Remark: The moon pilots whose we are training in the United States are
all in their late thirties, but the moon pilots whose the Russians are training
are all at least five and possibly ten years younger, so I would assume that
they must begin their training earlier and make it more intensive than we do,
just as they do most things more intensively.
Yes, I do not know how that works in general in their country. It
would be interesting to know.
I have been asked to say something about the puer aeternus problem
as seen in the animus in women. I have no material on that except for
some single dreams; that is, I have no coherent material. I had thought
that was something which should discuss some time, but the question
is whether you would like to do so now or first go into it deeper in
masculine psychology. It is just a question of whether now or later. [A
vote was taken and was in favor of continuing with the male problem now.] I
must say that I think we shall get more out of it if we first go deeper on
our present line, and the other will also become more convincing when
we go over it. I can say in a few words that in its basic structure the
problem is not different. It is just the same but one layer further in. You
could say that with a woman the animus always anticipates what she
has to do later in reality. So, if you have the problem of the puer
aeternus having to come down to earth, this is what the woman’s mind
has to do later; it is only one step removed, and naturally the puer
aeternus problem is always linked up with the creative problem, and
that is paramount in a woman’s psychology. If she has a puer aeternus
animus, she generally has a creative problem, and the cure for women
is unfortunately exactly the same as for men: it is also work.
When you say that, do you include having children?
Yes, that is sometimes the end of a puer aeternus problem. I
10

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

remember the case of a woman who did not want to have children,
and she always dreamt about puer animus figures and Nature pinning
her down to earth, the dreams wanting her to have children. So that
would be one of the main ways which a woman comes down to earth
and is committed definitely to something; she cannot toy around with
this and that anymore. This applies especially to women who are more
of the hetaera type, those who have lot affairs with a number of men
and do not want to be pinned down. The child makes the relationship
more definite. So that is one way which it takes with women. It is a lot
of work to have children—very regular work and boring sometimes.
Now we will turn to the interpretation of The Little Prince, and you
will see that the story falls into clearly defined parts, beginning with an
introduction which is told by Saint-Exupéry in the first person, like
part of a personal autobiography, after which comes the story of the
little star prince. The autobiographical part begins:
Once when I was six years old I saw a magnificent
picture in a book called, True Stories from Nature,
about the first primeval forest. It was a picture of a
boa constrictor in the act of swallowing an animal.
Here is a copy of the drawing.

In the book it said: “Boa constrictors swallow their
prey whole, without chewing it. After they are not
able to move and they sleep through the six months
that they need for digestion.”
I pondered deeply, then, over the adventures of the
jungle. And after some work with a coloured pencil I
11

Marie-Louise von Franz

succeeded in making my first drawing. My drawing
Number One. It looked like this:

I showed my masterpiece to the grown-ups, and
asked them whether the drawing frightened them.
But they answered: “Frighten? Why should
anyone be frightened by a hat?”
My drawing was not a picture of a hat. It was a
picture of a boa constrictor digesting an elephant. But
since the grown-ups were not able to understand it, I
made another drawing: I drew the inside of a boa
constrictor, so that the grown-ups could see it clearly.
They always need to have things explained. My
Drawing Number Two looked like this:

The grown-ups’ response, this time, was to advise me
to lay aside my drawings of boa constrictors, whether
from the inside or outside, and devote myself instead
to geography, history, arithmetic and grammar. This
is why, at the age of six, I gave up what might have
been a magnificent career as a painter. I head been
disheartened by the failure of my Drawing Number
One and my Drawing Number Two. Grown-ups
never understand anything by themselves, and it is
tiresome for children to be always and forever
explaining things to them.
So then I chose another profession, and learned to
pilot airplanes. I have flown a little over all parts of
the world; and it is true that geography has been very
12

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

useful to me. At a glance I can distinguish China from
Arizona. If one gets lost in the night, such knowledge
is valuable.
In the course of this life I have had a great many
encounters with a great many people who have been
concerned with matters of consequence. I have lived
a great deal amongst grown-ups. I have seen them
intimately, close at hand. And that hasn’t much
improved my opinion of them.
Whenever I met of them who seemed to me at all
clear-sighted, I tried the experiment of showing him
my Drawing Number One, which I have always kept.
I would try to find out, so, if this was a person of true
understanding. But, whoever it was, he, or she,
would always say:
”That is a hat.”
Then I would never talk to that person about boa
constrictors, or primeval forests, or stars. I would
bring myself down to his level. I would talk to him
about bridge, and golf, and politics, and neckties.
And the grown-up would be greatly pleased to have
met such a sensible man.
So I lived my life alone, without anyone that I
could really talk to, until I had an accident with my
plane in the Desert of Sahara, six years ago.
Something was broken in my engine. And as I had
with me neither a mechanic nor any passengers, I set
myself to attempt the difficult repairs all alone. It was
a question of life or death for me: I had scarcely
enough drinking water to last a week.
The first night, then, I went to sleep on the sand, a
thousand miles from any human habitation. I was
more isolated than a ship wrecked sailor on a raft in
the middle of the ocean. Thus, you can imagine my
amazement, at sunrise, when I was awakened by an
odd little voice. It said:
“If you please—draw me a sheep!”
“What!”
Then he meets the little prince. Now I want to ask what you conclude
from this first part. It contains the whole problem in a nutshell.
13

Marie-Louise von Franz

Remark: We see a lack of interest in adults and more childhood fantasies.
Yes. We see here that he has never really got into the world of the
adult. He speaks about its emptiness, its idiocy and its
meaninglessness. There is the talk about bridge and politics and
neckties, it is true, but that is the kind of adult world one rightly rejects
—it is persona emptiness. But he omits other aspects of the adult life as
well. You see in a feeling-tone of this first part that he means that all
the rest is empty persona running away after money, making a prestige
impression on other people, having lost one’s true nature, so to speak.
That is how he sees adult life, for he has not found a bridge by which
he could take over what we would call the true life into adult life. That
is the great problem, I think, in a nutshell; namely, how can one pull
out of this fantasy life of youth and youthfulness without losing its
value? How can one grow up without losing the feeling of totality and
the feeling of creativeness and of being really alive, which one had in
youth?
One can be cynical about it and say that one cannot have the penny
and the cake—it has to be sacrificed—but from my experience I do not
think that this is quite right. It is justifiable not to want to give up this
other world. The question is, how can one grow up and not lose it? The
great problem is that you can drive people out of this childhood
paradise and fantasy life, in which they are in close connection with
their true inner self on an infantile level, but then they are completely
disillusioned and cynical.
I remember once that I had an analysand who was a typical puer
aeternus and wanted to become a writer, but he lived in a completely
fantasy world. He came over from the States with a friend, and the two
made up their minds that they would meet and compare notes. They
went to different countries and met as arranged, and the young man
who had the Freudian analysis said that he was through with his
problem and was cured and was going home. Everything was all right,
and understood his infantile attitude towards life; he had given up his
mother complex and other nonsense. My analysand asked him what
he was going to do, and the other said he did not know but that he
must earn some money and find a wife. My analysand said that he was
not cured at all; he still did not know where to go yet. He knew that he
would become a writer and had started on the course, but he did not
know where to settle, and so on. Then the one who had had Freudian
analysis said, “Well, it is strange; they have driven out my devils, but
with them they have also driven out my angels!”
14

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

So you see that is the problem! One can drive away devils and and
angels by saying that that is all infantile and part of the mother
complex, and, by a completely reductive analysis, put everything
down on the childhood sentimentality which has to be sacrificed.
There is something to be said for that. This man was in a way more
cured than my analysand, but, on the other hand, it seems to me that
such a terrific disillusionment makes one ask afterward whether it is
worthwhile going on living? Is it worthwhile just to make money for
the rest of one’s life and get small bourgeois pleasures? It doesn’t seem
to me very satisfactory. At least with the sadness with which the man
who was cured remarked that with his devils his angels had also been
driven out made me feel that he himself did not feel quite happy about
his own cure. It had the tone of cynical disillusionment, which to my
mind is no cure. But that is the problem.
It must not be forgotten that the atmosphere of a milieu such as
Saint-Exupéry grew up in was very disillusioned and cynical and that
he usually moved in circles which looked at life being important when
one talked of bridge and money and such things. Therefore, he, in a
way, rightly, protests against it and clings to his inner artistic and total
view of life, and is resentful and revolutionary against such adult life.
One sees quite well how, in a subtle way, he mocks at the adult world
and how to the point that is. But at the same time he does not know
how to pull out of his childhood world without falling into the
disillusionment of what he sees as the only value in adult life. If you
combine this with the symbolism of that picture, it becomes even
worse because the boa constrictor obviously is an image of the
unconscious, which suffocates life and prevents the human being from
developing. It is the swallowing or the regressive aspect of the
unconscious, the looking-backward tendency, which grips one when
one is overcome by the unconscious. You could even say that the boa
constrictor represents a pull toward death.
The animal which is swallowed is an elephant, so we should look
into its symbolism. As the elephant was not known in European
countries until late antiquity, there is not much mythological material.
However, in late antiquity the elephant had great significance. When
Alexander the Great went to India he saw elephants, and they were
afterward brought to Europe. The Romans later used elephants in the
same manner as tanks are used in modern warfare. If we read what has
been written about them we see that a great deal of mythological
fantasy was spun around the elephant. It is said that “they are very
15

Marie-Louise von Franz

chaste, that they only mate once in a lifetime and very secretly in order
to produce their young and therefore,” according to a medieval
reporter, “they are an allegory of marital chastity. Like the unicorn, the
elephant also loves a virgin and can only be tamed by one, a motif
which points to the incarnation of Christ.” The elephant is said to
represent invincible fortitude and to be and image of Christ.
In antiquity it was thought that elephants were
terribly ambitious and that if they were not accorded
the honor due to them they would die from
disappointment, for their feeling of honor was so
great. Snakes love to drink the blood of elephants;
they creep under the elephant and drink its blood,
and suddenly the elephant collapses, which is why
whenever an elephant sees a snake he goes for it and
tries to trample it down. In the Middle Ages the
elephant was said to be generous, intelligent, and
therefore taciturn, but when he once gets into a rage
he cannot be appeased by sensual pleasures but only
by music.
This I have taken from a very amusing book, Polyhistor Symbolicus, by a
Jesuit Father, Nikolaus Caussinus. He gives such fantasy stories about
the elephant, having summed up what the antique idiom says and
then adding a little bit of medieval fantasy. “Elephants wash very
often,” he continues, “and use flowers to perfume themselves. Hence
they represent purification, chastity, and pious worship of God.” This
shows that the same thing happened to the Europeans as to the
Africans when they met up with an elephant for the first time: they
projected the archetype of the hero onto it. In Africa it is considered a
great honor if a person is given the title of lion, but the highest title
anyone can be given is that of an elephant. It is considered to be far
above the lion, which is the image of a courageous man of the Chief
type, for the elephant is the archetype of the medicine man, who also
has courage but, in addition, wisdom and secret knowledge. So, in
their hierarchy, the elephant represents the individuated personality.
Strangely enough, the European automatically projected the same
thing onto the elephants and took him as the image of the divine hero,
the image of Christ, outstanding in virtue, except for being moody and
inclined to fits of rage. That is amazing, but those were the two
outstanding qualities in, so that it could be said to be an exact picture
of his character. He himself was subtle, chaste—to a certain extent, in
16

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

the sense of being sensitive in his feelings—very ambitious and very
sensitive about everything affecting his own honor. He was continually
on the search for religious satisfaction—he did not worship God, for he
had not found him—but he was always on the search. He was
generous and intelligent and taciturn but very irritable and inclined to
terrible moods and fits of rage. So in the elephant there is an amazing
self-portrait, and one sees the archetypal pattern illustrated in a simple
individual, without even much difference. It can be said that the
elephant is the model fantasy of the grown-up here, and already this
model fantasy—the image in his soul of what he wanted to become-is
swallowed back by the devouring mother, and this first picture shows
the whole tragedy. Very often childhood dreams anticipate the inner
fate twenty or thirty years ahead. The first picture shows that SaintExupéry had a hero aspect, alive and constellated, and that this aspect
would never quite come through but would be swallowed back by the
regressive tendencies of the unconscious and, as we know from later
events, by death.
The devouring-mother myth should naturally also be pinned down
in connection with his own mother, but, as she is still alive and, in a
way, in a conspicuous position, I hesitate to comment on her too much.
I recently saw a photograph of her in a newspaper, which shows that
whatever else she may be, she is a very powerful personage. She is a
big, stout woman, about whom the newspaper article says that she has
a tremendous amount of energy, in interested at all a very dynamic
person and, in spite of the fact that she is now pretty old, is still going
strong. Obviously, it must have been very difficult for a sensitive boy
to pull away from the influence of such a mother. It is also said that she
always anticipated her son’s death. Several times she thought he was
dead and very dramatically dressed herself in large black veils such as
French women like to wear when they become windows, and then
rather disappointedly had to take them off again as he was not yet
dead. So the archetypal pattern of what we call mother is something
not so openly acknowledged, but I got the shock of my life when I had
the following experience.
I had to go somewhere to meet someone, and at that place the
house-owner had a puer aeternus son whom she had quite eaten up.
They were very simple people. They had a bakery and the son did no
work at all but wemt about in riding-kit and was a typical Don Juan
type, very elegant and having a new girl about every four days, but
that I only heard from the gossip around. This young man once went
17

Marie-Louise von Franz

bathing and carried his girlfriend out into the lake of Zürich and, in the
classical situation, halb zog sie ihn, halb sank er hin (“half drew she him,
half sank he down”)—as Goethe would have put it—and both went
under. The girl was saved, but when he was brought out he was
already dead. This I read in the paper, but when I came back to his
house, I bumped into the mother, who was a widow, and expressed my
condolences, saying how sorry I was when I heard the terrible
accident. She invited me in and took me to the sitting-room where
there was a very big photograph of the son on his death-bed,
surrounded by flowers, set up like a hero’s tomb, and she remarked:
“Look at him! How beautiful he looks in death.” I agreed, and then she
smiled and said: “Well, I’d rather have him like that than give him
away to another woman.”
Yes, she made a religious cult out of him and then he becomes the
dead.
Tammuz, Adonis, Attis; he replaces the image of God. He is really
also the crucified Christ and she is the Virgin Mary crying beside the
Cross, and the great satisfaction is that one has an archetypal meaning
in one’s life. One is not just Mrs. So-and-So who has lost her son in an
accident but the Great Mother, the Virgin Mary who weeps at the foot
of the Cross—and that elevates the mother herself and gives her
sorrow some deeper meaning; If she turns to it in the wrong way, then
it is like that. I was terribly shocked by what the woman said, but then
told myself that this woman has that naiveté to say what many other
have thought. Being a simple woman she said it right out: “It was
better that way than to give him to another woman.” She was his wife!
She just betrayed the fact. It seems to me that there must have been
something similar in Saint-Exupéry’s mother because otherwise why
should she always anticipate his death and wear black veils ahead of
time, as if she knew all along that it would end like that. Probably she
not only knew it, but in some way wanted it, or we might say that it
wanted in her. We only know that this terrible impersonal pattern has
penetrated her personal life too.
It is interesting that Saint-Exupéry says that he always goes around
with this picture and tries it out on people to make them understand. It
looks as though he were not definitely doomed, as though there was
still a hope, and attempt in him to find some understanding. If only he
could find somebody who would ask him what on earth he was
drawing, that it was dangerous and meant such and such a thing. He
wanted understanding but he did not get it. I think that if he had got in
18

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

touch—perhaps it was awfully optimistic—but if he had come into
touch with psychology, something might have been done about his
problem, because he was very near to finding the solution himself, but
somehow, tragically enough, he lived in this kind of light French
milieu where there is absolutely no psychological understanding yet at
work, and in such an atmosphere it is very difficult to get near the
unconscious. Modern French civilization, for different local and
national reasons, is particularly cut off from the unconscious, so that he
probably never met anyone who could give him a hint as to what was
happening.
The story then goes on over to the little prince, and I have already
read you the part where Saint-Exupéry’s airplane crashes in the
Sahara, where he meets this little fellow. I will go on with the text. The
voice said:

”Draw me a sheep!”
I jumped to my feet, completely thunderstruck. I
blinked my eyes hard. I looked carefully all around
me. And I saw the most extraordinary small person,
who stood there examining me with great
seriousness. Here you may see the best portrait that,
later, I was able to make of him. [He drew him like a
little Napoleon, by the way, which was a funny idea
19

Marie-Louise von Franz

and typically French!] But my drawing is certainly
very much less charming than its model. That,
however is not my fault. The grown-ups discouraged
me…[and then he goes off in the old way].
Now I stared at this sudden apparition with my
eyes fairly starting out of my head in astonishment.
Remember, I had crashed in the desert a thousand
miles from any inhabited region. And yet my little
man seemed neither to be straying uncertainty
among the sands nor to be fainting from fatigue or
hunger or thirst or fear.
Nothing about him gave any suggestion of a child
lost in the middle of the desert, a thous-and miles
from any human habitation. When at last I was able
to speak, I said to him:
“But—what are you doing here?”
And in answer, he repeated, very slowly, as if he
were speaking of a great matter of great consequence:
“If you please—draw me a sheep…”
When a mystery is too overpowering, one dare not
disobey. Absurd as it might seem to me, a thousand
miles away from any human habitation and in
danger of death, I took out of my pocket a sheet of
paper and my fountain-pen. But then I remembered
how many studies had been concentrated on
geography, history, arithmetic and grammar, and I
told the little chap (a little crossly, too) that I did not
know how to draw. He answered me:
“That doesn’t matter. Draw me a sheep…”
But I had never drawn a sheep. So I drew for him
one of the two pictures I had drawn so often. It was
that of a boa constrictor from the outside (his
Number One drawing). And I was astounded to hear
the little fellow greet it with,
“No, no, no! I do not want an elephant inside a boa
constrictor. A boa constrictor is a very dangerous
creature, and an elephant is very cumbersome. Where
I live, everything is very small. What I need is a
sheep. Draw me a sheep.”
So then I made a drawing.
20

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

He looked at it carefully, then he said:
“No, this sheep is already very sickly. Make me
another.”
So I made another drawing.

My friend smiled gently and indulgently.
“You see yourself,” he said “that is not a sheep.
This is a ram, it has horns.”
So then I did my drawing over once more. But it
was rejected too, just like the others.
21

Marie-Louise von Franz

”This one is too old. I want a sheep that will live a
long time.”
By this time my patience was exhausted, because I
was in a hurry to start taking my engine apart. So I
tossed off this drawing.
And I threw out and explanation with it.

”This is only his box. The sheep you asked for is
inside.”
I was very surprised to see the light break over the
face of my young judge.
“This is exactly the way I wanted it! Do you think
that this sheep will have to have a great deal of
grass?”

22

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

“Why?”
“Because where I live everything is small…”
There will surely be enough grass for him,” I said.
“It is a very small sheep that I have given you.”
He bent his head over the drawing:
“Not so small that—Look! He has gone to sleep…”
And that is how I made the acquaintance of the
little prince.
Then Saint-Exupéry says that it took him a long time to learn where he
came from because he always asked questions and did not answer
them. Slowly he finds out that the little man has come down from the
stars and that he lives on a very small planet.
The miraculous encounter in the desert is one way linked with
Saint-Exupéry’s personal life, for he once had an airplane crash in the
Sahara desert. He was not alone then, as in this book, but with his
mechanic, Prevost, and they had to walk endlessly and nearly died of
thirst. They already had hallucinations and saw mirages and were
practically dying when an Arab found them and gave them some
water out of his gourd. Later, they were rescued, but it was a very near
thing. Naturally, therefore, he uses this recollection here in the story,
but changes it very typically; namely, his shadow, the mechanic, is not
with him and he is not rescued for the moment, but something
supernatural happens. Then you see how the archetypal fantasy comes
into the memory of the real life, namely, the hopeless and impossible
situation where supernatural beings appear. In many fairy tales a man
gets lost in the woods and then finds a little dwarf, and so on. It is
typical that when someone is lost in the woods or on the sea,
something numinous appears. It shows the psychologically typical
situation where the conscious personality has come to the end of its
wits and does not know how to go on any more. One feels completely
disoriented, with neither goal nor outlook in life. In those moments,
energy, blocked from a further flow into life, piles up and generally
constellates something from the unconscious, which is why this is the
moment of supernatural apparitions such as we have here.
It often happens even in concrete situations that people have
hallucinations of some kind if the conflict and the blockage go far
enough. On a minor scale, the dream life becomes highly activated and
people are forced into paying attention to it, and then come the
apparitions within the dreams. Generally that happens when the
previous form of life has broken down. When he had this crash with
23

Marie-Louise von Franz

his mechanic, Saint-Exupéry was already in this crisis of this life. He
was in his thirties, flying was no longer satisfactory, but he could not
switch over to any other occupation. He already had these spells of
irritability and nervousness and broke through them by taking on
another flying job. Originally for him, flying had been a real vocation.
But slowly it became an escape from something new which he did not
know how to adapt. Very often one chooses some activity in life which
for the time being is absolutely right and could not be called an escape
from life, but then suddenly the water of life recedes from it and
slowly one feels that the libido wants to be reoriented to another goal.
One perseveres in the old activity because one cannot change to a new
one, and in such situations perseverance in the old activity means
regression, or flight—and escape from one’s own inner feeling, which
says that one should now change to something else. Because one does
not know how, nor wants, to go in a different direction, one perseveres.
When Saint-Exupéry has his airplane crash, he was already beginning
to enter the crisis stage of his aviator’s life. Here the apparition shows
what is meant.
There is a marked parallel to the meeting of the star prince in Islamic
tradition. I think it is even possible that, having lived so long in the
Sahara and having made friends with a number of Bedouins, SaintExupéry might have heard about it. In the 18th Sutra of the Koran
there is the famous story, which Jung has interpreted in detail, of
Moses in the desert with his servant Joseph, the son of Nun, who is
carrying a basket with a fish in it for their meal. At a certain place the
fish disappears, and Moses says that they will stay there because
something will happen, and suddenly Khidr appears. (Khidr means
“the verdant one.”) He is supposed to be the first angel or the first
servant of Allah. He is a kind of immortal companion who then goes
along with Moses for some time, but tells him that he (Moses) will not
be able to stand him and will doubt his deeds. Moses assures him that
he will have enough confidence to go with him, but he fails miserably.
Most of you know the story of how Khidr first comes to a little
village where there are boats on the water and how he drills a hole in
each so that they sink, and Moses remonstrates, asking Khidr how he
could do such a thing. Khidr says that he said that Moses would not
understand, but then explains that robbers would have stolen the boats
and that by bringing about this minor calamity the fisherman would be
able to repair their boats and still have them, whereas otherwise they
would have been lost. So that really Khidr was doing them a service,
24

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

but Moses naturally being too stupid had not understood. Then again
Moses promises that he will not doubt again and will not have rational
reactions. Next they meet a young man and Khidr kills him. Again
Moses explodes and asks how he could do that, Khidr smiles again
and says he had told him that he would not be able to stand it. He then
explains that the young man was on his way to murder his parents and
that it was better for him to die before he became a criminal, and
thereby save his soul. This time Moses is really willing to accept the
explanation, but then a third time something similar happens when
Khidr causes a wall to collapse, only to uncover a hidden treasure
belonging to two orphans. As Moses rebels, Khidr has to leave him.
The story illustrates the incompatibility of the conscious rational ego
with the figure of the Self and its purposes. The rational ego with its
well-meaning intentions and thought and so on, is absolutely off the
track in relation to the greater inner personality, Khidr, and naturally
this famous story serves to tell people that they should be able to
doubt their conscious attitude and should always expect the
miraculous thing from the unconscious to happen. There is the same
situation here, for something happens which is absolutely contrary to
Saint-Exupéry’s conscious ideas, which tell him that he wants to repair
his engine and has no time. He wants to save himself with the old
airplane and is not willing to go on with the childish play with the
little star prince. On the other hand it is very significant that the little
star prince is the only one who at once understands the drawing. So
Saint-Exupéry should be very pleased and see that it is his other side
which really understands him, the first companion who belongs in his
world. But he is impatient and just thinks it a nuisance and that he has
to get his engine in order. And then something absolutely classic
happens, namely, the gesture of impatience. That is typical for the puer
aeternus! When he has to take something seriously, either in the outer
or the inner world, he makes a few poor attempts and then impatiently
gives up.
My experience is that it does not matter, if you analyze a man of this
type, whether you force him to take the outer or inner world seriously;
that is really unimportant, though perhaps it depends on the type. The
important thing is that he should stick something out. If it is analysis,
then analyze seriously, take the dreams seriously, live according to
them, or, if not, then take a job and really live the outer life. The
important thing is to do something thoroughly, whatever it is. But the
great danger, or the neurotic problem, is the puer aeternus, or the man
25

Marie-Louise von Franz

caught in this problem, tends to do what Saint-Exupéry does here: just
put it in a box and shut the lid on it in a gesture of sudden impatience.
That is why such people tell you suddenly that they have another plan,
that this is not what they were looking for. And they always do it at the
moment where things become difficult. It is the everlasting switching
which is the dangerous thing, not what they do, and here
unfortunately Saint-Exupéry switches at this crucial moment.

26

Lecture 2

Last time we spoke of the boa constrictor which ate up the elephant
and of how Saint-Exupéry as a boy made the drawing and was always
looking for somebody to understand it and never found anyone. We
said that this short introduction foreshadowed the tragic end of the
book and of Saint-Exupéry’s life, since there was no lysis. In the hero
myth, if the hero is swallowed by the dragon, or the big snake, or the
seamster, or the whale, he has to cut the heart or the stomach from the
inside, or he dances inside the whale until the monster either dies or
vomits the hero out. In our story, the hero animal—we interpreted the
elephant as a kind of symbolic anticipation of the hero on the animal
level—is swallowed and does not come out again. We can, therefore,
take this introduction, which has no lysis, symbolically, as a childhood
dream, which would mean that the childhood fantasy of Saint-Exupéry
has no lysis. This shows that there is something basically weak or
broken in him from the very beginning. There is something which
cannot escape the fatal aspect of the unconscious.
Saint-Exupéry, in a slightly ironical manner, speaks mockingly of the
grown-up world and grown-up people who take themselves so
seriously and are really occupied with such trifles. That he himself had
such attributes is shown quite clearly in his biographies. General
David, one of his military superior, says of him:
He was a man of integrity with a taste for childish
pleasures which were sometimes surprising, and he
had unaccountable fits of shyness when faced with
administrative stubbornness; the latter always his betê
noir.
Other biographies state that he was a little bit disappointing to people
27

Marie-Louise von Franz

who met him because he was a bit of a poseur; he gave the impression
of always acting and of not being a completely genuine personality.
This tendency to go off into surprisingly childish pleasures in not only
a symptom of the puer aeternus problem, but also belongs to the
creative personality. Creativeness presupposed a tremendous capacity
for being genuine, for letting go, for being spontaneous—for if one
cannot be spontaneous one cannot really be creative—and therefore
most artists and other creative people have a normal and genuine
tendency to playfulness. That is also the great relaxation and means of
recovery from an exhausting creative effort. Therefore we cannot
ascribe this trait only to Saint-Exupéry’s puer aeternus nature; it might
also belong to the fact that he was an artist.
The remark made by General David that Saint-Exupéry never
overcame his rage over administrative obstinacy, either of state or the
Military, and that on the other hand, he was shy and afraid of those in
administrative positions, is important in connection with the motif of
the sheep, which we now have to discuss. To the man in an office other
people are sheep, and as soon as we are faced with somebody in an
official position we become sheep and he the shepherd. We are just
number So-and-So to him, and naturally officials will make one feel
like that. It is the modern problem of the overwhelming power of the
State, the devaluation of the individual, which on a minor scale is the
problem of every puer aeternus whenever he has difficulty adapting,
but it also the problem of our time. The revolt which most people feel
at being reduced to the level of a sheep in a flock is not confined to the
puer aeternus, for there is something genuine and justifiable in it.
Everyone who has not settled that problem within himself—namely,
how far one has accept the fact of being just a number and how much
one is an individual with the right to individual treatment—has this
complex reaction against what David describes as military
stubbornness.
The problem is not only Saint-Exupéry’s, but is the great problem of
the whole Christian civilization. In France, however, it takes a specific
turn, for the French tend to display exaggerated individualism, a kind
of protest against all administration, though lately under de Gaulle’s
government there has been some change. Since the First World War
there has been a tendency in France to revolt and be negative in
connection with everything having to do with the pressure of the State,
even to the extent that numbers of people voted for Communism, not
because they were really Communists in their Weltanshauung but
28

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

simply as a demonstration against the existing order. Such people
would proclaim that since they did not like the lawyers and clowns in
Paris who constituted the Government, they intended to vote
Communist. This shows an infantile attitude toward the problem of
social and collective responsibility. It is the attitude which we now see
exploding in the behavior of teenagers who challenge the police or
overturn a row of cars or do some such thing as a protest against
collectivity. That, however, is understandable on part of very young
people who explode like this without any reflection, but when grownups behave similarly, when they vote for Communism simply because
they do not like those in the Government, seems very immature. This
is a very general complex which we all have in some form, for we have
not decided how far we must accept being sheep shepherded by the
State and how far we can reject such collective pressure and revolt
against it. The puer aeternus naturally has this problem in an even more
pronounced form.
Before we go into the symbolism of the sheep, we should ask
ourselves why Saint-Exupéry meets the little prince in the desert, In
interpreting the story we have taken the airplane crash as illustrating,
in one way, an accident of Saint-Exupéry’s personal life and, on the
other hand, a symbolic or archetypal situation which every encounter
with the unconscious begins, namely, the complex breakdown of
former activities, the goal in life and, in some form, the flow of the life
energy. Suddenly everything gets stuck; we are blocked and stuck in a
neurotic situation, and in this moment the life energy is dammed up
and then generally breaks through in a revelation of an archetypal
image. Last time I quoted the Islamic story of the 18th Sura of the
Koran where, after having lost his only nourishment, the fish, Moses
took Khidr, Allah’s first angel, with him into the desert. It is not
inevitable that after such a collapse a child image would emerge; any
other kind of archetypal figure might turn up. We should therefore go
into the symbol of the child-god, and I first want to read to you what
Jung says. I want to subdivide this, the greatest symbol there is in the
book, because part of what the prince really represents only becomes
clearer much later when we know more of the story. Now I will only
read, as a general outline, what Jung says about the child-god:
The archetype of the “child god” is extremely
widespread and intimately bound up with all the
other mythological aspects of the child motif. It is
hardly necessary to allude to the still live “Christ
29

Marie-Louise von Franz

Child,” who in the legend of Saint Christopher, also
has the typical feature of being “smaller than small
and bigger than big.” In folklore the child motif
appears in the guise of the dwarf or the elf as
personifications of the hidden forces of nature. To this
sphere also belongs the little metal man of late
antiquity…who, till far into the Middle Ages, on the
one hand inhabited the mine-shafts, and on the other
represented the alchemical metals, above all
Mercurius reborn in perfect form (as the
hermaphrodite, filius sapientiae, or infans noster).
Thanks to the religious interpretation of the “child,” a
fair amount of evidence has come down to us from
the Middle Ages, showing that the “child” was not
merely a traditional figure, but a vision
spontaneously experienced (as a so-called “irruption
of the unconscious”). I would mention Meister
Eckhart’s vision of the “naked boy” and the dream of
Brother Eustachius. Interesting accounts of these
spontaneous experiences are also to be found in
English ghost-stories, where we read the vision of a
“Radiant Boy” said to have been seen in a place
where there are Roman remains. This apparition was
supposed to be of evil omen. It almost looks as
though we are dealing with the figure of the puer
aeternus who has become inauspicious through
“metamorphosis,” or in other words has shared the
fate of the classical and the Germanic gods, who have
all become bugbears. The mystical character of the
experience is also confirmed in Part II of Goethe’s
Faust, where Faust himself is transformed into a boy
and admitted into the “choir of blessed youths,” this
being the “larval stage” of Doctor Marianus.2
I do not know whether Goethe was referring, with
this peculiar idea, to the cupids on antique gravestones. It is not unthinkable. The figure of the
2

“The Psychology of the Child Archetype,” The Archetypes of the Collective
Unconscious, CW 9i, par. 268. ( CW refers throughout toThe Collected Works of
C.G. Jung)
30

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

culcullatus points to the hooded, that is the invisible
one, the genius of the departed, who appears in the
child-like frolics of a new life, surrounded by seaforms of dolphins and tritions. [If I may interpret
Jung’s quotation, culcullatus means “one who wears a
hood,” who has a coat with a hood, and I think it
highly symbolic that Jean Cocteau, who wore this sort
of coat, thereby instituted the fashion of youths
wearing these hooded coats. They are pueri aeterni
and even wear that costume! I wonder what Cocteau
knew about that.] The sea is the favorite symbol for
the unconscious, the mother of all that lives. Just as
the “child” is, in certain circumstances (e.g., in the
case of Hermes and the Dactyls), closely related to the
phallus, symbol of the begetter, so it comes up again
in the sepulchral phallus, symbol of renewed
begetting.3
The great problem with which we are confronted in this general
outline by Jung is the double aspect of the child archetype. Just as in
one way it means a renewal of life, spontaneity, and a new possibility
suddenly appearing within or without and changing the whole life
situation in a positive way, so also does the child-god have a negative
aspect, a destructive one; namely, where Jung alludes to the
apparitions of the “radiant boy” and says that this must have to do
with a pagan child-god who has been condemned to appear only in a
negative form. The negative child-god leads us into very deep waters,
but it is safe to say then whenever the child motif appears we are
almost always confronted with the following problem.
The child motif when it turns up represents a bit of spontaneity, and
the great problem—in each case an ethical individual one—is to decide
whether it is now and infantile shadow which has to be cut off and
repressed, or something creative moving toward a future possibility of
life. The child is always behind and ahead of us. Behind us, it is the
infantile shadow which must be sacrificed—that which always pulls us
backward into being infantile and dependent, lazy, playful, escaping
problems and responsibility and life. On the other hand, if the child
appears ahead of us, it means renewal, the possibility of eternal youth,

3

Ibid., par. 298.
31

Marie-Louise von Franz

of spontaneity and of new possibilities—the life flow towards the
creative future. The great problem is to always make up one’s mind in
each instance whether it is an infantile impulse which only pulls
backward, or an impulse which seems infantile to one’s own
consciousness but which really should be accepted and lived because it
leads forward.
Sometimes the context of the dreams shows very clearly which is
meant. Let us say to a puer aeternus type of man dreams about a little
boy; then we can tell from the story of the dream if the apparition of
the child has a fatal effect, in which case I treat it is at the infantile
shadow still pulling backward. But if the same figure appears positive,
then you can say that something which looks very childish and silly
but which must be accepted because there is still a possibility of new
life in it. If it were always like that, then the analysis of this kind of
problem would be very simple, but unfortunately, like all products of
the unconscious, the destructive side and the constructive, the pull
backward and the pull forward, are very closely intertwined. Such
figures can be very difficult to understand, and sometimes it is
practically impossible. That seems to me a part of the fatal situation
with which we are confronted in this book and in Saint-Exupéry’s
problem, for one cannot (or at least I cannot) make up one’s mind
whether to treat the figure of the little prince as destructive infantile
shadow whose apparition is fatal and announces Saint-Exupéry’s
death, or to treat it as the divine spark of his creative genius.
One of our students has evolved the idea that there is something like
a defective Self, that in certain people whose fate is very unfortunate
the symbol of the Self appears defective, which would mean that such
people have no chance in life because the nucleus of their psyche is
incomplete and defective. So the whole process of individuation
cannot develop from this kernel. I do not agree with this idea because I
have never seen such symbols of a defective Self without an
accompanying defective attitude of the ego. That means that wherever
you find such a defective Self symbol, where it is ambiguous and
incomplete and morbid, there is always at the same time an incomplete
and morbid attitude of the ego, and therefore it could not be
scientifically asserted that the cause of the whole thing lies in a
defective Self. It could just as well be said that it was because the ego
has such a wrong attitude that the Self cannot come into play
positively. If you eat completely wrongly and your stomach
consequently does not react properly, you can react one of two ways.
32

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

You can decide that there is something wrong with your stomach, and
go to numbers of doctors about it without telling them that you are
eating all wrong, in which case the doctors will conclude that it is very
tragic but that you have a defective stomach and it is not possible to
find the cause. But, on the other hand, it can just as well be said that if
one eats all the wrong things, or does not eat, or eats irregularly, then it
is not the stomach which is at fault. This the defective Self always goes
with an ego which does not function properly either. If the ego is lazy,
inflated, not conscientious, does not perform the duties of the egocomplex, then it is clear that the Self cannot appear positively either.
If that man were here today he would certainly object and say, “No,
it is the other way round, the ego cannot function because the Self is
defective.” There we are confronted with the age-old philosophical
problem of free will: “Can I want the right thing?” That is the problem
which the puer aeternus man will generally put to you. He will say that
he knows that everything goes wrong because he is lazy, but that he
cannot want to be lazy! That perhaps that is his neurosis, that he is
unable to fight his laziness, and therefore it is useless to treat him as a
rascal for whom everything would go right if he were not so lazy. That
is an argument which I have heard I don’t know how many times! It is
to a certain extent true, for the puer cannot make up his mind to work,
so you can say that is the defective Self, that something is wrong with
the whole structure and cannot be saved.
This is a problem which comes up in many neuroses, not only in
that of the puer aeternus. It goes very deep, and my attitude toward it is
paradoxical: as long as I can, I behave as if the other could make up his
or her mind because that is the only chance of salvation. If nevertheless
the case goes wrong, then I turn around and say that it was not
possible for things to have gone differently. Otherwise one falls into a
wrong psychological superiority; namely, that if a person goes wrong,
or dies as the result of a disease or an accident, and one concludes that
this occurred because he did not realize his problem—that is his fault
that he has this fate—that I consider disgusting. One has not the right
to decide that. Nature has her own revenge. If an individual cannot
solve his problems, he generally gets horribly punished with hellish
diseases or accidents and it is not the business of others to point that
out and make it a moral issue. There I think one should stop short and
take the other hypothesis—that the person could not do it, that the
structure was defective and therefore it was not possible. However, as
long as the catastrophe has not taken place, it is better to take the other
33

Marie-Louise von Franz

attitude, to try to create a hopeful atmosphere and believe in the
possibility of a certain amount of free will, because empirically there
are many cases where suddenly people can make up their mind to
fight their neurosis and can pull out. Then you can call it a miracle or
that person’s good deed, whichever you like, but it is also that which
in theology is spoken as an act of grace. Is it your good deeds which
lead to salvation, or is it the grace of God? In my experience you can
only stay in the contradiction and stick to the paradox. We are
confronted with that problem in a specific form here because
throughout the story there is this tragic question in our minds.
Something is constantly going wrong through the book and one does
not know whether it is Saint-Exupéry’s fault of whether he could not
help it. Was there some reason from the very beginning which
prevented him from solving his problem?
Remark: But Jung says that there is no sickness in the collective
unconscious and so, as the Self is an archetype, it does not seem to me that
there can be anything defective.
I quite agree. I think that if it appears defective, it is because of the
wrong ego attitude. Objectively, in itself, it cannot be defective, which
is why I cannot accept the idea of the defective Self. If the ego is able to
change, something else changes; if the ego-attitude changes, then the
symbols of the Self become more positive. That is something we
experience again and again. If the person can achieve a certain amount
of insight, then the whole unconscious constellation changes. But my
philosophical adversaries would say that the fact that one man can
change and the other cannot is due to the Self—and then one walks in
a circle.
In this specific story I shall therefore try to interpret the child figure
in a double way—as the infantile shadow and the Self. Then we will
try to find out which is which. That means that we shall interpret all
the material on a double rail and so try to find out more about this
problem. The thesis that the star child whom Saint-Exupéry meets is
the infantile shadow can be very easily proved, since he is the only one
who understands the story of the boa constrictor and the elephant.
That is a remnant of childhood. And we have a letter from SaintExupéry to his mother written in 1935, shortly before his death, where
he says that the only refreshing source he finds is in certain memories
of his childhood, for instance, the smell of Christmas candles. His soul
nowadays is completely dried up and he is dying of thirst. There is his
nostalgia for his childhood and therefore is the infantile shadow. Is is
34

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

typical that he writes like that to his mother; one really sees that he is
still involved in the mother complex. On the other had, it can be said
that the fact that this child appears on earth is not only negative. It is
not the apparition of just the infantile shadow, because, as we shall
hear later, the little prince comes down from a star, so one could say
that an interesting parallel has taken place. Saint-Exupéry crashed, and
from the stars above something else has come down, for the little
prince comes from a planet. So for the first time two things meet on
earth which hitherto were in the air: the star prince, who was far away
in the cosmos, and Saint-Exupéry, who was constantly flying in the air.
The moment the little prince lands on the earth, he is not quite the
infantile shadow any more because something has touched reality and
is therefore now in an ambiguous position. If it could be realized, then
it would become part of the future, instead of a pull backward. It is no
longer only an infantile shadow but a form of realization which goes
on all the time, for to become conscious means, practically, to grow
more and more into the reality of things—it means disillusionment.
The greatest difficulty we drag along with us from our childhood is
the sack of illusions which we carry on our backs into adult life. The
subtle problem consists in giving up certain illusions without
becoming cynical. There are people who become disillusioned in early
life; you see it if you have to analyze orphans from either very low or
very high layers of society, those who are nowadays called neglected
children, which means either that they are just poor children who have
grown up in slums and had a terrible family life and fate, or very rich
children who had all the same miseries except lack of money—
divorced parents, a bad atmosphere at home and so on—that is, where
the feeling atmosphere has been neglected, which is so important for
children. Such people often grow up quicker than others because at a
very early stage they become very realistic and disillusioned and selfcontained, and independent—the hardships of life have forced them to
this—but you can generally tell from a rather bitter and falsely mature
expression that something went wrong. They were pushed out of the
childhood world too soon and crashed into reality.
If you analyze such people you find that they have not worked out
the problem of childish illusions but have just cut it off, having assured
themselves that their desire for love and their ideals simply hammer
them like a sack of stones carried on their backs, so they must all be
done away with. But that is an ego decision which does not help at all,
and a deeper analysis shows that they are completely caught up in
35

Marie-Louise von Franz

childhood illusions. Their longing for a loving mother or for happiness
is still there, but in a repressed state, so that they are already really
much less grown-up than other people, the problem having simply
been pushed into a corner. One then has the horrible task of reviving
those illusions because life has stuck there. So the person has to be
pushed back into them in order to emerge again properly. That is the
problem one meets with in people who say that they can neither love
nor trust anybody. For anyone stuck in that situation, life no longer has
any meaning. Through the transference they begin to hope that
perhaps they might trust or love again, but you can be sure that the
love which first comes up is completely childish, and the analysand
very often knows what will happen and that it will just mean
disappointment again and be of no use. This is quite true, for such
people bring out something so childish that it has to be rebuffed either
by the analyst or by life itself. Such people are so immature in their
feelings that if, for instance, that analyst is in bed with flu they
experience that as a personal insult and a terrible let-down and
disappointment. Quite grown-up people say that they know it to be
absolutely unreasonable and idiotic but that is how they feel. They ask
quite rightly, “What does one do if one has such a child, such
incorrigible infantilism within oneself”? Preaching does no more good
that it would to a small furious child, who just does not listen.
How can one meet this tremendous problem? If one shelves it as
something hampering in life, as a source of illusion and trouble, then
one is no longer spontaneous, but disillusioned and grown-up in a
wrong way, but if one lives it one is just impossible and reality hits one
over the head all the time. That is the problem. People who have
shelved their feelings, or their demands on other people, of their
capacity for trust, always feel not quite real, not quite spontaneous or
really themselves. They feel only half alive and they generally also do
not take themselves quite real. To shelve the divine child means not
taking oneself completely seriously. One acts! One can adapt
throughout life, but if one is honest with oneself, one knows that it is
acting. Otherwise one would behave in such an infantile way that
nobody could stand one. So what can one do?
That is the problem of the divine child when it appears in this inbetween state. One just does not know what to do. Theoretically the
situation is clear: one should be able to cut away the childishness and
leave the true personality. One should somehow be able to disentangle
the two, and if an analysis goes right that is what slowly happens. One
36

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

succeeds in disentangling and destroying what is really childish and in
saving the creativity and the future life. But, practically, this is
something which is immensely subtle and difficult to accomplish.
The divine child, or star prince, whom Saint-Exupéry meets in the
desert, asks for a sheep, and we learn that he has come down to fetch a
sheep to take back with him. Later in the story it is said that on the
planet there is an overgrowth of baobab trees which are continually
sprouting. The star prince wants a sheep to eat the shoots as they
appear so that he does not constantly have to work at cutting them off.
But this he does not explain to Saint-Exupéry, and the real reason only
comes out later.
At first we have to look at the symbolism of the sheep in the
personal life of Saint-Exupéry and then also in general mythology. In
one of his books, Saint-Exupéry says himself:
There is no bad outer fate, only an inner one. There
comes a moment when you are vulnerable and your
own mistakes seize you and pull you down like a sort
of whirlpool. [He naturally must be speaking with
reference to flying. He means that there is no such
thing as a chance to crash: the one day you have an
accident is the result of a whole inner and outer
process.] It is not the big obstacles that count so
much, but the little ones: three orange trees on the
edge of an airfield, or thirty sheep, which you fail to
see in the grass and which suddenly emerge between
the wheels of your plane.
You know that at one time in many places flocks of sheep were used to
keep down the grass on the airfields, and it could happen that your
plane by some mistake ran into them. One could say that he projects
onto the sheep that fateful thing which one day kills the puer aeternus,
or in this case himself. It is the fatal enemy.
The sheep has a very revealing name in Greek. It is call probaton,
which comes from the verb “to walk forward,” so it would mean “the
walking forward animal.” This is a marvelous name: The animal has
no other choice and no other function than the capacity to walk
forward! That is all it can do! The Greeks are even more witty, for they
make the animal neuter and call it “the walking forward thing.” That
illustrates the most negative aspect of the sheep, which always follows
the leading ram wherever it goes. You can read again and again in the
papers that if a wolf or a dog chases the leading ram over a precipice,
37

Marie-Louise von Franz

two or three hundred sheep will jump over after him. This happened
about ten years ago at Lenzerheide on an Alp when a wolf-hound
chased the leading ram over the precipice and afterward men had to
go with their guns and knives and kill about two hundred sheep. They
were not all dead, but they had just piled up one on top of the other.
That is why sticking together in the flock is so strong in them that they
cannot pull out even to save their lives.
Those who have seen Walt Disney’s film The White Wilderness have
seen the same thing with lemmings, who wander into the sea. Once
caught up in such an instinctive move, the animal cannot pull out
again. The sheep tends to a similar instinctual behavior and therefore
stands—when it appears in a negative connection in dreams—for the
same thing is in us, mass psychology, our tendency to be infected by
mass movements and do not to stand up for own judgement and
impulses. The sheep is the crowd-animal par excellence. Naturally, there
is the crowd-man in each of us. For instance, you may hear that there
are a lot of people at a lecture and you say, “Then it must be good.” Or
you heard that someone has an exhibition at the Art Gallery and you
go, but you don’t have the courage to say that you think the pictures
are horrible. You first look round and see others, who you think ought
to know, admiring them, and you daren’t express your own opinion.
Many people first look at the name of the artist before expressing an
opinion. Such people are all sheep.
The sheep in mythology has a strange relationship to the world of
the divine child. You all remember representation of the Madonna,
very often together with her own mother and Christ and St. John the
Baptist playing with a lamb, or sometimes there is only Christ and St.
John the Baptist (these are mainly from the sixteenth century on)
playing with the little lamb. Or there is the Christ-child with a lamb,
holding a cross, and so on. Naturally the lamb is a representation of
Christ himself, but in art it is exteriorized as something separate. He
himself is the sacrificed lamb, the agnus dei, but in art the sheep is
shown as the playmate which naturally means (as always, when a god
is depicted with the animal) that it is his totem animal, his animal
nature. That is what he is when he appears as an animal. In German
folklore there is a belief that the souls of children before they are born
live as sheep in the realm of Mother Holle—a kind of earth-mother
goddess—those souls of unborn children are identical with what the
Germans call Lämmerwölkchen (lamb-clouds)—in English, “fleecy
clouds.” The peasants thought these “little sheep clouds” were the
38

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

souls of innocent children. There was the idea that if on Innocents’ Day
there were many such clouds in the sky, that predicted the death of
many male children.
Further, if you look up the traditional beliefs about sheep, you will
find that they carry the symbolism of innocence, that they are easily
influenced and affected by the evil eye and witchcraft. They can be
killed by the evil eye. A sixth sense is also attributed to sheep, for by
their behavior they are supposed to be able to predict the death of the
owner, and so on. That to me is not so interesting because that sort of
thing is projected onto many domestic animals. Horses are also
supposed to have a sixth sense, as are bees, so that is not something
confined to sheep. But to be easily bewitched and persecuted by
witches and wolves is specific to sheep in folklore tradition.
Milk, another white substance, is also a symbol of innocence and
purity but it can be bewitched at any time. One of the chief activities of
wizards and witches in peasant countries is to spoil the neighbor’s
milk. Therefore innumerable precautions have to be taken: milk must
not be carried across the street after seven o’clock in the evening, the
bucket must be turned round before the cow is milked, three “Aves”
have to be said, and so on. Our hygienic precautions are nothing
compared with the precautions against witchcraft made in earlier
times. They were infinitely more complicated, because if a witch even
walks past in the street, the milk in the bucket will turn sour, or blue, at
once. If an evil eye is cast onto the cowshed then the milk will be
bluish from then on and and exorcist must be found. It is interesting
that symbols of something especially pure and innocent are
particularly exposed to infection or to attack by evil. This is because
the opposites attract each other, for that is a challenge to the powers of
darkness.
In the practical life of the puer aeternus, that is, of the man who has
not disentangled himself from the eternal youth archetype, one sees
the same thing: a tendency to be believing and naive and idealistic,
and therefore automatically to attract people who will deceive and
cheat such a man. I have often noticed in analyzing men of that kind
how they are attracted in a fatal way to rather dubious women or pick
friends about whom one has not a good feeling. It is as though their
inexperienced naiveté and their wrong kind of idealism automatically
call forth the opposite, and it is no use warning such people against
such relationships. You will only be suspected of jealousy, or
something similar, and not be listened to. Such naiveté or childish
39

Marie-Louise von Franz

innocence can only be cured of these illusions by passing through
disappointment and bad experiences. Warnings are no good—such
men must learn by experience, without which they will never wake up
from their innocence. It is as if the wolves—namely, the crooks and
destructive people—instinctively see such lambs as their legal prey.
This naturally leads to much deeper into the whole problem of our
religious tradition.
As you know, Christ is the shepherd and we are the sheep. This is a
paramount image in our religious tradition and one which has created
something very destructive, namely, that because Christ is the
shepherd and we the sheep, we have been taught by the Church that
we should not think or have our own opinions, but just believe. If we
cannot believe in the resurrection of the body—such a mystery that
nobody can understand it—then one must just accept it. Our whole
religious tradition has worked in that direction, with the result that if
now another system comes, say Communism or Nazism, we are taught
that we should shut out eyes and not think for ourselves, that we
should just believe the Führer or Kruschev. We are really trained to be
sheep!
As long as the leader is a responsible person, or the leading ideal is
something good, then it is okay. But the drawback of this religious
education is now coming out very badly, for the Western individuals of
the Christian civilization are much more easily infected by mass beliefs
than the Eastern. They are predisposed to believe in slogans, having
been told that there are so many things they cannot understand and
must just believe in order to be saved. So we are trained to be like
sheep. That is a terrific shadow of the Christian education for which
we are now paying. Saint-Exupéry’s work shows that he was
possessed by this idea. He says in The Citadel :
To build the peace is to build a stable big enough to
embrace the whole flock, so that the whole flock can
sleep in it. [What an ideal! Just put mankind to sleep!]
To build the peace is to borrow from God his
shepherd’s cloak so that all people can be accepted
under it, under the divine cloak.
You see he identifies with God. He is the Godhead who accepts
mankind under his cloak, the religious megalomania of the puer
aeternus. And now comes another complex:
It is just like a mother who loves her sons, and one
son is timid and full of tenderness, another burning
40

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

to live, and another is perhaps a hunchback, another
perhaps delicate, but all of them in all their
differences move to the heart of the mother, and all in
the difference of their love serve the glory.
In French it is even more sentimental and more impressive:
Bâtir la paix, c'est bâtir l'étable assez grand pour que le
troupeau entier s'y endors. Bâtir la paix, c'est obtenir de
Dieu qu'il prète son manteau de berger pour reçevoir les
hommes dans tout l'éntendu de leur désir. Ainsi de la mère
qui aime ses fils et celui-là est timide et tendre et l'autre
ardent à vivre, et l'autre peutêtre bossu, chétif et malvenu,
mais tous, dans leurs diversités eneuvent son coeur, et tous
dans la diversité de leur amour servent la gloire.
There you see how the religious image of the divine shepherd and the
sheep is mixed up with the mother-complex sentimentality in a very
dangerous way. Suddenly it is the mother who is the shepherd and the
children are the sheep. If a wolf comes and eats the shepherd and takes
the cloak, then you see what happens to the sheep! It is just the
opportunity for a wolf! In the religious situation the wolf may be the
great dictators and leaders we have now, or any kind of person who
lies and cheats in public life. In the private life it is the animus of the
devouring mother who takes the lead for the sheep-son. And then
there are the decent, devoted sons who believe that they have to honor
and be chivalrous to their mother, the elderly lady, and do not see that
the animus of the mother feeds on the innocence. The devouring
animus of the mother feeds on the innocence and the best and most
devoted feelings of the son, and there too the sheep have been eaten by
the shepherd.
So the little star boy in our story wants a sheep and we learn that it
is needed to eat the over prolific trees, which are obviously a symbol of
the devouring mother. Wanting the sheep seems at first sight to have a
positive meaning, since the asteroid is threatened by overgrowth. As
the overgrowth of trees is a complex mother symbol, the sheep would
be something to help fight the mother complex. Now I have just
illustrated it the other way round, with the sheep as part of the mother
complex, and not as the right remedy against that overgrowth. So here
again it seems to me that we are confronted with complete ambiguity.
In what way does the sheep help combat the mother complex?
Afterward we can see how it cooperates. The story says that it bites off
the new shoots, which are the overgrowth of the mother complex, but
41

Marie-Louise von Franz

what does that mean psychologically. How much does the crowd-man
within us help against the mother complex?
Answer: The mother does not seem to be so devouring when he surrenders
to her.
You mean that if the sheep walks into the wolf’s mouth then the
wolf gets less dangerous because he is well fed, in a way? I don’t think
that a son who gives in to his mother’s devouring desire has ever
succeeded in improving matters. That has not been my experience, for
the devouring principle generally fattens and grows on every bite it
gets.
Answer: I would say that everybody has to get free of the mother.
Yes, and what can help to free the man from the mother?
Answer: If a man follows his pattern, namely, frees himself from his
mother, then he is doing the right thing.
You mean he hears a psychological saying that everybody has to free
himself from the mother? If he does that he really follows the sheep
mentality, he does it because “one says so,” and by that he frees
himself from the mother. That is quite correct. You can say that
normally very few young men have a strong enough individuality to
pull away from the mother of their own accord; they do it via
collectivity. For instance, in our country it is the military service, but
this collective adaptation can be a help to pull away, especially here in
Switzerland. In the simpler layers of the population, military service
still functions to a great extent like the male initiation rituals in
primitive tribes; it is the moment to leave the mother. You can say that
all kinds of very humble, not individualistic, collective adaptations
help against the mother complex. As mentioned before, doing one’s
work, going to military service, trying to behave like everyone else, not
having that kind of fancied individuality which is typical for the
mother-complex man, and giving up the idea of being somebody
special, all that helps against the poison of the mother complex. To
accept being just somebody or nobody, in the crowd, is to a certain
extent a cure, but only a temporary one and not a whole cure. It is only
the first step to pulling away from the personal mother.
You see— similbus curantur (like cures like)—how dangerous
situations are generally cured by dangerous situations. To become a
crowd-man is psychologically a very dangerous thing, but it helps
against the danger of the false individuality which one develops with
the mother complex. Then one is up against another danger—the
medicine used in such a case is dangerous. Therefore, that the star
42

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

prince wants a sheep could be interpreted positively, for he wants in
his ideal, divine isolation the company of the crowd-soul. That would
enlarge his asteroid and his world. There are not animals up in his star
world, and if he brings one, that is bit of an earthly instinct which he
has brought up there. That seems extremely positive. But you could
interpret it negatively also, for it is not a conscious realization but only
pitting instinct against mother. His unconsciousness is not changed.
One instinct just pulls away from another, which is expressed in the
story, and I think you can arrive at a definite judgement and say that it
is completely negative.
Remark: The sheep in the box!
That adds to it. I would say rather that he wants to take the sheep
up, instead of going down to it; he wants to pull the sheep up into the
stars. A sheep is something which walks on the earth. So if, in order to
have it, he would stay on the earth, then it would be the thing which
pulled him down into reality. In the same way, a man gets pulled down
onto the earth if he goes through military service and a lot of other
painful adaptations. But if you take the sheep up into the fantasy
world of childhood, then it is not an adaptation to reality, it is a
pseudo-adaptation. That is something very subtle and I think is
specific to Saint-Exupéry and not very wide and I think that it is
specific to Saint-Exupéry and not very widespread in other cases. For
him it is a particular danger, but one which you can only judge if you
know his generally literary work. There you can see that he did
something very strange, for he praises clinging to the earth, social
adaptation, submission to the earthly principle, acceptance of the
bonds of love, and so on.
However, all that he praises, he does not stand by, for he assimilates
the whole thing intellectually and takes it back to his imaginary world.
It is a trick which many pueri aeterni perform; the realization that they
should adapt to reality is an intellectual idea to them which they fulfill
in fantasy but not in reality. The idea is executed only in reflection and
on a philosophical level, but not on the level of action. It looks as
though they have quite understood, as if they have the right attitude,
as if they know what is important and right. But they don’t do it. If you
read Saint-Exupéry’s work you could attack me and say that he is not a
puer aeternus. Look at the Shiekh in The Citadel, a mature man who
would take responsibility on earth. Look at Riviera in Vol De Nuit; he is
not a puer aeternus but a man who accepts his responsibilities. He is a
grown-up, masculine man, not a mother-complex fellow. It is all there
43

Marie-Louise von Franz

in his ideas, but Saint-Exupéry never lived the Shiekh or Riviera; he
fantasized them, and the idea of down-to-earth, grown-up man, but he
never lived his fantasy.
That, I think, is one of the trickiest problems in that specific neurotic
constellation, that the puer aeternus tends to grasp at everything which
would be the right thing to do and then to draw it back into his
fantasy-theory world. He cannot cross the very simple border from
fantasy to action. It is also the dangerous curve in the analysis of such
people, for unless the analyst constantly watches this problem like an
alert fox, the analysis will progress marvelously, the puer aeternus will
understand everything, will integrate the shadow and the devil’s
watchdog behind it, it is all a sham. The whole integration takes place
up in the sky and not on the earth, not in reality, so that it comes down
to having to play the governess and ask what time he gets up in the
morning, how many hours have been worked in the day, and so on. It
is a very tedious job, but that is what it boils down to because
otherwise the fantastic self-deception occurs which can very easily
catch the analyst.
We should now consider the sheep in the box. When you assimilate
something intellectually, you put it into a box. A concept is a box.
When Saint-Exupéry impatiently puts the sheep in the box, he accepts
the idea, but as an idea. It exists but only in his brain-box. The little
prince thinks the design is as good as a real sheep. Everything remains
in the world of mental activity.
Question: If Saint-Exupéry had been cured of his puer aeternus
personality, would he have continued to be an artist?
Being “cured” of being a puer does not imply being “cured of being
an artist.” If we consider Goethe we can see that in his early writing
there is evidence of a mother complex. He too felt that if he gave up
the puer mentality there would be nothing left. But he pulled though
this crisis, and although the puer in his book The Sorrows of Werther shot
himself, Goethe himself survived.
In the really great artist there is always a puer at first, but It can go
further. It is a question of the feeling of judgement. If a man ceases to
be an artist when he ceases to be a puer, then he was never really an
artist. If analysis saves such pseudo-artists from being artists, then
thank God! His art is very neurotic: he writes out his neurosis, and it is
doubtful that he was a great artist. As such a fuss is made about him,
his work might be looked upon as an expression of the neurosis of the
present day. But he has displayed the situation in literature, and so
44

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

beautifully; he has raised the question. There is a type of artist that
cannot make the switch that Goethe made, and these have to die. One
cannot say that they have not been artists, but they did not grow
beyond that switch-over. In the Sorrows of Werther Goethe did not deal
with the problem of the puer in a final way, and it went into other
works. In the next step, in his drama Torquato Tasso, Goethe represented
it as a problem within himself. Simultaneously, by objectifying the puer
Tasso and Antonio, the man who wants to live on earth, he detached
from the problem. It then becomes a conflict that goes even further in
Faust, One’s feeling tells one when the writer does—or does not
extricate himself from this problem. Objectifying the puer is only the
first step.
Question: Can you qualify the statement that laziness is a characteristic of
the puer aeternus? Goethe and Saint-Exupéry both worked hard in their lives.
The puer aeternus has to learn to carry on with work he does not like,
not only with the work where he is carried away by great enthusiasm,
which is something that everybody can do. Primitive people who are
said to be lazy can do that, for as soon as they are gripped by
something they work, even to the point of exhaustion. I would not
evaluate that as work but as being carried away by a festival of work.
The work which is the cure for the puer aeternus is where he has to kick
himself out of bed on a dreary morning and again and again take up
the boring job—through sheer willpower. Goethe took on a political
position and served in Weimar, sitting in his office and reading little
requests concerning taxation, and so on. That is what he experienced in
his work as Antonio; that somehow all belonged in his life. Goethe
lived what he wrote. He stayed in his office and gave his mind to the
most boring questions when often he would have preferred to ride off
somewhere. But somehow he had a deep insight into the necessity of
that part of life. Being a feeling type he thus developed his inferior
thinking, which showed very much in the rather boring and unexciting
side of his maxims (his conversations with Eckerman are most
disappointing).
Remark: Perhaps that throws light on Rousseau’s statement that greatest
fault in his character was his laziness, but it is known that he worked from
morning to night and read many great books.
Yes, but he must have escaped to some other kind of work. People
can cheat themselves by working themselves to death in order to avoid
the work they should do. Rousseau had to keep his feet in a tub of
water in order to get himself to work; he worked in a kind of trance
45

Marie-Louise von Franz

with footbaths. His Confessions might have been more to the point and
less sentimental without these baths!
Remark: To go back to the idea of an author writing out his neurosis—
many people are celebrated for that and such an activity is taken for talent.
I do not think that it is mistaken for talent; I think it is something we
would all like to be able to do. I would like very much to make money
out of my neurotic spots. I think the problem comes after the thing has
been written. I think what one writes does concern one’s own problem
—otherwise the writing dries up—but when you have written out the
problem, or while you are writing it, you have to live it. Whenever I
have lectured on a problem, it has always come back on me afterward.
I have observed that with sensation types it does the other way round:
they live it first, and then write it. When you are writing on a problem,
synchronistic events often happen to you at the same time, so that you
have to live it concurrently. Jung told me that when he was writing on
a special problem he would get letters from all sorts of places,
Australia and elsewhere, which put to him the question he was then
writing on. If you touch on an important and vital problem of your
own, it generally happens that way, sometimes behind and sometimes
ahead of you. That is the difference between only writing of your
neurosis or going further. The problem will always tie in with you, and
if you live it at the same time, then afterward what you next write will
be a step further on. Otherwise you will again write of the same
problem, which is what Saint-Exupéry did. Such writers always turn
on the same gramophone record, whereas if you live it, the next thing
will show progress.
Goethe lived what he wrote, and what he next wrote was always a
step further on. The romantic poets repeated themselves much more.
They went round in a circle because they did not, or could not, live it at
the same time. I do not mean to make accusations, but one should be
prepared for what one writes being constellated. So many artists do
not want their work to be analyzed because they are afraid that they
then have to live it, and that is the pseudo-resistance which many of
them have against psychoanalysis, for they say that their creativity
would be analyzed away. But genuine creativeness is so terribly strong
that not even the most gifted analyst in the world could wipe it out.
This resistance to putting their work to the test is therefore very
suspect.

46

Lecture 3

I have been asked privately about the problem of the sheep being put
in a box. This listener thought that I had been too hard on SaintExupéry, who in his life has shown courage and the capacity for
substantial reaction, and that one could not accuse him of trying to
escape reality, or at least not in this way. I think this simply shows that
I have not made myself clear.
Putting the sheep in a box not a gesture of escape but springs from
what one might call a certain nervous weakness, a weakness in health
and strength. One needs a certain vital strength in order to stand a
conflict. Saint-Exupéry wants to get back to work on his engine, and
the star prince, instead of letting him quickly draw a sheep, bothers
him, saying this drawing is not right, nor this, nor this. So SaintExupéry is torn between the child—whose importance he completely
realizes and who in a typically childlike way bothers him, for he feels
sure that even if he draws another sheep it won’t be right, or there will
be a lot of questions—and the urgent need to get his engine in order. If
you take that symbolically, it means a conflict between the demands of
the inner and outer life which establishes a tremendous tension. How
can you comply with the demands of outer reality, which reason tells
you is right, and those of the inner life at the same time?
The difficulty is that the demands of the inner life need time. You
cannot do active imagination for five minutes and then go off and do
other things. If, for instance, one is in analysis, dreams have to be
written down and this may mean two hours’ work, just writing them
down, which is only the beginning, for one has not yet done any work.
One should meditate on them. That is a full-time job, but very often
there are also urgent necessities of outer life, and this is one of the
47

Marie-Louise von Franz

worst and most difficult tensions to stand—to be capable as far as
possible of giving each claim what it needs. That weak personality—
and I don’t mean “weak” as a moral criticism—would imply not being
strong physically. The weak personality reacts with a short-cut
reaction, making a definite decision to do one and put the other aside.
Here there is an incapacity for standing the tension beyond a certain
extent. This is relative, for nobody can stand tension beyond a certain
point, but a weak personality has an impatient reaction, whereas a
strong personality can continue in the tension for longer. In this case,
one sees that Saint-Exupéry, after the third attempt to draw the sheep,
gives up and devises a short-cut solution in order to get back to his
engine. This is an indication of a weakness that shows in certain other
elements of the story. For instance, the star prince’s planet is very tiny,
he himself is very delicate, or, to take the first dream, the hero does not
come out of the devouring snake, that is, the mother. It is all a bit fatal
a bit on the weak side. Also if you look at the photographs of SaintExupéry, you will see that he has a very strange “split” face: the lower
part of it is like that of a boy of seven, the expression of the mouth is
completely immature; it is a naive little child’s mouth, and there is a
thin little chin, whereas the upper part of the face gives the impression
of a very intelligent and mature man. Something is weak just like a
child; there are certain tensions which he cannot stand. I do not mean
my comment as a criticism, but as a statement such as a doctor might
make, saying that the person is not strong and would probably not
survive pneumonia. There is no criticism, but the statement of a tragic
fact.
There are other men swallowed by the puer aeternus problem who
would have the strength to stand more conflict, but who also react out
of sheer impatience and not from a tragic weakness. It is a given fact in
the mother complex that the sufferer does not want to stick out a
situation. In Aion Jung says, for instance:
There is in him a desire to touch reality, to embrace
the earth and fructify the field of the world. But he
makes no more than a series of fitful starts, for his
initiative as well as his staying power are crippled by
the secret memory that the world and happiness may
be had as a gift—from the mother. The fragment of
world which he, like every man, must encounter
again and agin is never quite the right one, since it
does not fall into, does not meet him half way, but
48

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

remains resistant, has to be conquered, and submits
only to force. It makes demands on the masculinity of
a man, on his ardor, above all on his courage and
resolution when it comes to throwing his whole being
into the scales. For this he would need a faithless
Eros, one capable of forgetting his mother.4
So you see impatience is sometimes an effect of the mother complex. I
think in the case of Saint-Exupéry it is that too, but on top of it there is
something tragic, namely an inborn weakness which is something he
cannot be held responsible. That means that his very vitality was
crushed by his mother; it is a tragic fate where nothing can be done.
Question: Did you say “a faithless Eros”?
Yes. That would mean the capacity to turn away from time to time
from a relationship. That would lead to another great problem, namely,
that of the puer aeternus , in the negative sense of the word, very often
tends to be too impressed and too weak and too much of a “good boy”
in his relationships, without a quick self-defense reaction where
required. For instance, he takes much too much from the animi of the
women around him. If one of them makes a scene, finding fault with
him about this or that, he accepts too much of it at first and then
suddenly one day he has had enough and just walks out of the whole
situation, in a completely cruel and reckless manner. You could say
that consciously he is too weak and yielding, and the unconscious
shadow is too cruel, reckless and unfaithful. I have seen some who
have taken practically everything from girlfriends (where one would
have expected a woman to flare up long before), and then one day the
puer aeternus just walks out on the situation and turns to another
woman, not even answering the first one. There is no transition stage.
The yielding “good boy,” the man who gives in too much, is suddenly
replaced by the cold gangster shadow without any human relatedness
whatsoever.
The same thing happens in analysis: they accept everything, never
come out with resistances or assert their own standpoint against that of
the analyst, but out of the blue suddenly say that they are going to
another analyst, or giving up analysis altogether, and you fall out of
the sky if you have not happened to notice that this was coming. There
are no thanks, nothing at all. It is just finished. At first there was

4

Aion, CW 9ii, par. 22
49

Marie-Louise von Franz

insufficient coldness and independence, or masculine aggressiveness,
and afterward too much in a negative, inhuman and unrelated form.
That is typical for many pueri aeterni . Much more strength would be
required to have the thing out patiently with someone than just first to
give in, and then walk out.
To continue our story, there now comes a long conversation in which
Saint-Exupéry learns that the little prince has fallen from heaven, from
Asteroid B-612, and that he wants the sheep so that it may eat up the
baobab trees up there. I have never discovered what the association is
for the number of the asteroid—612. One can imagine from the way in
which it is described that Saint-Exupéry is playing with his
astronomical and mathematical knowledge and wants to express the
idea of little star X-Y. If there is a symbolic meaning, I don’t know what
it might be, or at least could not make a definite assertion.
The great danger comes from the baobab sprouts which grow into
huge trees and whose roots, if allowed to grow, would split the planet.
So the little prince is kept constantly busy pulling up the little plants
before they grow too big. That is his constant worry, and his idea was
to get a sheep from the earth which would eat the shoots to relieve him
of the constant fight with the baobab tree. (In German the trees are
called Affenbrotbaum, the ape-bread tree. They are big trees which grow
in Africa.)
Saint-Exupéry says that it would take a great many elephants to eat
such trees. The little prince says that if he needs a lot of elephants, he
would have to put them one upon the other; they would have space
otherwise, and from such remarks Saint-Exupéry constructs the
situation. He makes a drawing to give his idea of what it would look
like if the elephants were put one on top of the other, since there is not
sufficient space on the asteroid for enough elephants to eat enough of
the trees. His sketch shows three elephants on one side, two on two
other sides, standing upon each other, but the two elephants on the
fourth side he draws from the back, so the fourth function is turned in
another direction.

50

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

It is interesting that without knowing anything about Jungian
psychology he makes three alike and the fourth turning the other way.
The three elephants—the main function and the auxiliaries—have a bit
of overweight, and the fourth function is turned and looks in the other
direction. Saint-Exupéry says:
So, as the little prince described to me, I have made a
drawing of the planet. I do not like to take the tone of
a moralist. But the danger of the baobabs is so little
understood, and such considerable risks would be
run by anyone who might get lost on an asteroid, that
for once I am breaking through my reserve.
“Children,” I say plainly, “watch out for the
baobabs!”

51

Marie-Louise von Franz

My friends, like myself, have been skirting over this
danger for a long time, without ever knowing it; and
so it is for them that I have worked so hard over this
drawing. The lesson which I pass on by this means is
worth all the trouble it has cost me.
Perhaps you will ask me: “Why are there no

52

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

drawings in this book as magnificent and impressive
as this drawing of the baobabs?”
The drawings in the book, which are by Saint-Exupéry himself, are
very light both in color and drawing, but one of the baobab trees has
much deeper colors and is done with much more care and accuracy. He
says himself that he has worked on it, and you see that at once, for not
only are the colors strong but a lot of trouble has been taken to draw
the details of the tree.
The reply is simple. I have tried. But with the other I
have not been successful. When I made the drawing
of the baobabs I was carried beyond myself by the
inspiring force of urgent necessity.
Here we touch the main problem. Saint-Exupéry says that when he
made the drawings of the baobabs, he felt the terrific danger. There are
three big trees, but there is also a fourth figure, namely a small boy
dressed in red with an axe in his hand. The little prince tells SaintExupéry that he had a neighbor on another asteroid who was too lazy
to pull up the little roots of the baobab, so they grew to the size shown
in the picture and then it was too late. There he stands with his axe but
cannot cut down the trees and his asteroid perishes. The drawing
shows the big trees and the helpless boy, and from the little axe and the
size of the large trunks of the trees you see that there is no chance of
cutting the trees down any more. That is the “urgent” drawing, the one
which Saint-Exupéry draws with an enormous effort.
If we take the first problem of the elephants which have to be piled
on top of each other on the asteroid, you see what I was diving at
before. What would you say was the trouble in that picture?
Answer: The mother trouble is piling up more and more.
Yes, but the elephant is not the mother problem. The problem is the
hero, the male hero-substance, the thing which is eaten up by the
snake, that is, he himself. The trouble is not that the elephants are too
big, but the earth is not strong enough to carry them. The elephants are
ok, but there is not enough space for them. What would that mean?
Answer: The ego is not strong enough.
No, I am not sure that you could say the ego. I think that is the result
perhaps. Well, we often say of people that they have not enough earth
—that is a kind of intuitive way of talking—but what do we mean by
that?
Answer: That they are not in touch with reality.
Yes, they can have earth, but they can fly off of it, though that is not
53

Marie-Louise von Franz

so bad. Some people have a lot but are not in touch with it, while
others have no earth, or not enough, even if they are in touch with it,
which would mean that there isn’t enough vitality. It is naturally an
irrational concept, an intuitive concept. You could call earth
psychological substance. You see that again and again. One of the great
problems in psychotherapy is how much substance has that person?
How much can he carry? You can only guess that with your feeling;
have a feeling impression about it. It cannot be weighed scientifically,
and sometimes one can misjudge the situation. Sometimes you think
that a person hasn’t much substance, and when it comes to a vital
conflict suddenly a lot appears, surprisingly. About other people you
have the feeling that they can carry a lot, but then, out of the blue, they
break down. They have no strength. So it is something which is only
seen by results. But if one has some experience with people, then one
may be able to guess more or less correctly how much carrying
substance there is.
As you know, in his theory of schizophrenia, Jung makes a
difference between what he calls the asthenic type and the strong type.
In the strong type the problem is that there is an overwhelming wealth
of strength and fantasy in the unconscious, confronted with a relatively
weak ego, and because of that the person can split. But you can say
that in the strong type really it is a plus which makes them ill. In the
asthenic type the minus makes the person ill. Somewhere neither the
ego nor the unconscious has quite enough impetus. People in such a
situation have no dreams. Where, in the greatest conflict, you would
expect a vital reaction from the unconscious, the dreams are small and
petty, or there are none. It is as though Nature does not react.
It is very important to know that, because naturally, in the strong
type one can risk a kind of reckless therapy and, for instance, just
confront the person with the problem and risk a terrific crisis, a healing
crisis, and then they come through. With the asthenic type you can
never do that. There one must adopt a nursing attitude, making
constant blood transfusions, so to speak, never forcing the problem or
pushing the person up against the wall because that would break
them. One does not have to decide that oneself; in general, the
unconscious decides. In the asthenic type the dreams themselves do
not push the problem. I have often been amazed when people of this
type who have the most urgent problem have dreams which only talk
about this detail or that detail and do not poke into the main problem.
Then I say to myself, “Well, it is not meant; the confrontation would
54

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

not be possible. The unconscious knows better than I do and says that
this problem cannot be touched. It is too hot; it would explode the
person.” One has to go along with the seemingly little dreams there are
and take the advice contained in them. With the strong type you
generally see that the dreams hit directly at the core of the problem,
with great dramatic structure, and then you see that the whole thing Is
driving to a climax and a healing crisis. After a situation of terrific
conflict, the thing decides itself either for good or for ill.
The same thing occurs to a certain extent in the physiological makeup of a certain people, who, if they get pneumonia, have a tremendous
reaction. There is a life-and-death fight with very high fever, but they
get through and are cured. Others, and this is much more uncanny,
don’t get any fever, only a little increased temperature, and the illness
drags on and does not come to a climax because the vital reaction in
the body is not strong enough; there is not sufficient vitality.
Sometimes there are combined cases. For instance, there may be strong
people who in one corner are weak, so the situation is mixed. Someone
may have a vital make-up, belong to the plus type with which risks
can be taken, but somewhere there is a minus, a split in the make-up.
Here the situation becomes even more difficult because one has to
follow two lines, putting a lot of weight where it can be carried but
never pressing on the one weak point which needs endless nursing,
care and patience. That is a combination often to be found in very split
personalities. There is an unusual capacity for life, but extreme
vulnerability in one corner, which has to be fenced off and especially
cared for. Such mixed types are not really difficult, for if one can only
get them to realize the situation themselves, they can take care of their
weak spots. It simply means making them realize their dangerous
corner. But you have to do the nursing with patience, not force, and
constant attention to the weak spot so that it may slowly recover.
I think Saint-Exupéry is a mixed type, neither weak nor strong. He
has tremendous strength, courage, vitality, and the capacity to change
difficult situations. But one corner of his personality is extremely weak
and lacking in vitality, and that is what this planet personifies.
Naturally that one corner is the essential corner in his case, and the
symptoms of having no vital reactions where they are important go
through the whole book. So you can say that the will to live is too
small in comparison with his genius and capacities. The earth signifies
the will to live and the acceptance of life, and that is his weak spot. The
incongruity of the personality is the problem. This does not so much
55

Marie-Louise von Franz

illustrate the puer aeternus problem in general, but is a specific problem
in Saint-Exupéry, one often found combined with the other. While the
person who has too little earth may be able to assimilate everything
psychologically, he will have great difficulty realizing things in reality.
Such people take everything in analysis with honesty and strength, but
when you press them to do something about it in outer reality, then a
terrific panic comes up. At the moment when the inner realization has
to be put into life, strength collapses and you are confronted with a
trembling child, who exclaims, “Oh no! That I cannot do!” This is an
exaggerated illustration of the introvert’s attitude in which there is
great strength in accepting the inner truth but very little when it comes
to real life. That is when the trembling child appears.
We have now looked at the only two elephants drawings in the
whole book, and it is interesting to compare them. They represent
reverse situations: in the first, the elephant is overwhelmed by the
snake; in the second the elephant is the overwhelming thing, and it has
not enough earth, which shows that the situation can be regarded from
two angles: namely, either that the greater personality, the hero, in
Saint-Exupéry has been overwhelmed by the devouring unconscious—
by the mother complex—or that the hero personality in Saint-Exupéry
did not have enough foundation in order to become real. They are two
aspect of the same tragedy. It is interesting that the little prince himself
says that a boa constrictor is a very dangerous creature and an
elephant is very cumbersome. Saint-Exupéry is between the devil and
the deep blue sea, for he does not know how to get on with either of
them.
The baobab trees in the drawing are enormous and give the
impression of overrunning the whole star with their luxuriant growth,
so you can say that Mother Nature is overwhelming the field of human
culture and consciousness. If you look at the picture you see that the
roots of the trees are drawn exactly like snakes. I think also that it is not
by chance that he chooses in the first drawing a boa and calls these
baobab trees. There seems to be a play on the words. He seems to have
associated the two factors: both boa constrictor and the trees are
overwhelming. We should therefore amplify the trees rather on the
negative side. How would you interpret them in this drawing? Many

56

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

of you are attending Rivkah Kluger’s lectures.5
Answer: Gilgamesh had to cut down the cedar tree.
Yes, Gilgamesh has to cut down the cedar tree in Ishtar’s forest
where the tree represents the power of Ishtar. Among other things, she
is the tree goddess who has appointed Chumbaba as the guardian to
defend the tree. Here again the tree is linked up with the negative
mother. What are other amplifications?
Answer: The tree is a symbol of life itself.
Yes, if you read Jung’s easy, “The Philosophical Tree,” there the tree
is generally interpreted as the symbol of life, of inner growth, of the
process of individuation and of maturing, but here that does not fit.
Remark: The tree is very often connected with mother goddesses, not only
with Ishtar but Idunn in German mythology and in Greek mythology with
Demeter and others.
Yes, the tree is frequently connected with the mother-goddess, who
is often even worshipped as a tree, but there is an even closer
relationship: for instance, Attis in the tree, or Osiris who hung in his
coffin in a tree. There the tree is what one generally in mythology calls
the death-mother. The coffin in the tree, and the dead person being put
in the coffin, was interpreted as being given back to the mother, put
back into the tree, the death-mother. At the Festival of Attis in Rome a
fir tree was carried with an image of Attis at the top of the tree,
generally only the torso. In Symbols of Transformation Jung quotes an
old poem which says that the Christian cross has been looked upon as
being the terrible stepmother who killed Christ. That would be the first
association, namely that the tree is the mother, the coffin, and has to do
with the death of the puer aeternus god. How can you interpret that?
We get into a contradiction , for symbolically the tree often represents
the process of individuation, but here that same symbol is identified
with death, a destructive factor.
Remark: In the drawing the tree is monstrous. It is too big for the star,
which would indicate the the mother problem is too large and devouring.
Yes, but how do you connect it with the process of individuation?
The process of individuation is a process of inner growth to which one
is attached; one cannot get away from it. If one says no to it and does
not accept it, the, since you are not in it, it grows against you. Then it is
5

(This is a reference to Dr. Kluger’s lectures on the Gilgamesh Epic, which
have been published as The Archetypal Significance of Glilgamesh: A Modern
Ancient Hero.—ED.)
57

Marie-Louise von Franz

your own inner growth which kills you. If you refuse the growth, then
it kills you, which means that if a person is completely infantile and
has no other possibility, then not much will happen. But if the person
has a greater personality within—that is, a possibility of growth—then
a psychological disturbance will occur. That is why we always say that
a neurosis is in a way a positive symptom. It shows that something
wants to grow; it shows that that person is not right in his or her
present state and if the growth is not accepted then it grows against
you, at your expense, and produces what might be called negative
individuation. The process of individuation, or inner maturing and
growth, goes on unconsciously and ruins the personality instead of
healing it. That is how the death-tree, the death-mother tree and the
life-tree are essentially connected. The inner possibility of growth in a
person is a dangerous thing because either you say yes to it and go
ahead, or you are killed by it. There is no other choice. It is a destiny
which has to be accepted.
If you look at the puer aeternus in the negative sense, you can say
that he does not want to outgrow the mother problem; he does not
want to outgrow his youth but when the growth goes on all the same
and it destroys him. He is killed by the very factor in his soul by which
he could have outgrown his problem. If in actual life you have to
contend with such a problem, then you see how people refuse to grow
and become mature and tackle the problem, and more and more a
destructive unconscious piles up. Then you have to say, “For God’s
sake, do something for the thing is growing against you and you will
be hit over the head by it.” But the moment may come, as the star
prince says in the book, when it is too late, for the destructive growth
has sucked up all the energy. The luxuriant growth is also an image of
a rich fantasy life, of an inner creative richness. Very often you find in
the puer such a rich fantasy life, but that wealth of fantasy is dammed
back and cannot flow into life because the puer refuses to accept reality
as it is. He dams up his inner life.
In actuality, for instance, he gets up at 10:30 a.m., hangs around till
lunch time with a cigarette in his mouth, giving way to his emotions
and fantasies. In the afternoon he means to do some work but first
goes out with friends and then with a girl, and the evening is spent
long in discussion about the meaning of life. He then goes to bed at
one, and the next day is a repetition of the one before, and in that way
the capacity for life and the inner riches are wasted. They cannot get
into something meaningful but slowly overgrow the real personality so
58

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

that the individual walks about in a cloud of fantasies, fantasies which
in themselves are interesting and full of rich possibilities, full of
unlived life. You feel that such a person has a tremendous wealth and
capacity but there is no possibility of finding a means of realization,
and then the tree—the inner wealth—becomes negative, and in the end
kills the personality. That is why the tree is frequently linked up with
the negative mother symbol, for the mother complex has that danger.
Because of it the process of individuation can become negative.
There is a parallel in the Finnish epic Kalevala, which described the
fight of the divine child and the tree:6
A man rose out of the sea, a hero from the waves. He
was not the hugest of the huge nor yet the smallest of
the small: he was as big as a man’s thumb, the span of
a woman. His helmet was of copper, copper the boots
on his feet, copper the gauntlets on his hands.
Väinamöinen asked the hero from the sea what he intended to do, and
he replied,
”I am a man as you see—small, but a mighty waterhero. I have come to fell the oak-tree and splinter it to
fragments!” Väinamöinen, old and wily, scoffed:
“Why, you haven’t got the strength, you’ll never be
able to fell the magic oak-tree and splinter it to
fragments.”
But the little man took his axe.
He struck the tree with his axe and smote it with the
polished blade once, twice, and a third time. Sparks
flew from the axe and flame from the oak as he tried
to bend the magic tree to his will. At the third stroke
the oak-tree was shattered; the hundred boughs had
fallen. The trunk stretched to the east, and the top to
the west, the leaves were scatted to the south and the
branches to the north…Now that. The oak-tree was
felled and the proud trunk leveled (now comes the
important part) the sun shone again and the dear
moon glimmered pleasantly, the clouds sailed far and
wide and a rainbow spanned the heavens.
There you see that when the wrong inner overgrowth of fantasy is

6

See C.G. Jung and Carl Kerényi, Essays on a Science of Mythology, pp. 41f.
59

Marie-Louise von Franz

pulled down and recognized as being simply the mother complex,
then another dimension of consciousness appears—the sky is seen
again, the clouds can sail far, and the sun and the moon can shine. It is
not a narrowing of the horizon, for the pulling down that wrong
growth of fantasy means widening of the human horizon. I think that
it is an infinitely important text because one of the objections which the
puer aeternus always brings up when you want to encourage him to fell
the tree is that he does not want such a narrowing of the horizon. What
would be left if he had to give up his wishful fantasies, his
masturbating, and such stuff? He would be just a petty little bourgeois
who goes into his office, and so on. He could not stand such
narrowing! But it is not true! If one has the courage to cut down this
wrong kind of inner greatness, it comes again, but in a better form—
the horizon and life are widened and not narrowed. I think this myth
should always be told when the hero has to cut the tree, because that is
always what he does not want to realize, or believe. If he only knew
how much wider life would be if he could give up that wrong kind of
inner life, then he might perhaps do it.
The little prince’s asteroid has not yet been destroyed by the baobab
tree, whose shoots he wants the sheep to eat, but his neighbor’s
asteroid has been. How would you interpret this fact? The only
drawing by which Saint-Exupéry admits that he was carried beyond
himself, “by the inspiring force of urgent necessity,” is the one which
he describes the lost situation, where there is no more hope. Into that
drawing he put his whole love and energy. How would you interpret
the doubling of the asteroids psychologically? The one which is not yet
lost and the other which is?
Answer: The one is the shadow’s star.
Yes, you could say that. The lazy fellow who let the trees grow too
big is a shadow of our little prince, which is why the latter speaks of
him so negatively, calling him the lazy neighbor who did not cut the
trees. And now see what has happened! But what does that mean for
Saint-Exupéry psychologically, if the divine child motif doubles and
falls apart into the divine child and his shadow?
Answer: One part has already been swallowed up by the mother complex.
Yes, that’s right. It is already half eaten but that would not yet be
hopeless. On the contrary, it could also turn out well.
Remark: It is a very serious warning if he could understand it. He puts
himself into the drawing.
Yes, but I am driving at something slightly different. First a general
60

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

question. What does it mean if a motif doubles into a Yes and a No?
Answer: That something is on the edge of consciousness
Yes, you can say that doubling is a symptom that something is
beginning to touch the edge of consciousness, but why does it then fall
apart into the opposites?
Answer: We are unable to perceive the opposites united—as one (the state
they are in in the unconscious)—so when we see them simultaneously, we see
them as two. Then, as they come closer to consciousness, it seems as if one
part recedes into the unconscious and the other side comes forward.
Yes, it comes forward if things go right. In what way can you now
prove that theory? How would you apply it to the material? In what
way is the star prince a yes and no, before he falls apart? What is the
yes and no in this divine child?
Answer: One side of the child is infantile and the other a symbol of the
Self.
Yes, exactly. You could say that the star prince figure is the infantile
shadow, or a symbol of the Self. Up till now that figure appeared
double; you could never quite know which way to take it, whether
negatively, and call it the infantile shadow, or positively, and call it the
Self. Hitherto we were always in trouble as to how to interpret the
child figure: was it infantilism or was it the future life? It was and is
both, and this the terrible difficulty. I want to remind you briefly of
what Jung says in his essay on “The Psychology of the Child Archetype”:
The “child” is… renatus in nova infantium (reborn into
a new childhood). It is thus both beginning and end,
an initial terminal creature. The initial creature
existed before man was, and the terminal creature
will be when man is not. Psychologically speaking,
this means that the “child” symbolizes the preconscious and the post-conscious essence of man. His
pre-conscious essence is the unconscious state of
earliest childhood; his post-conscious essence is the
unconscious as well…[And now comes the really
important sentence:] The “eternal child” in man is an
indescribable experience, an incongruity, a handicap,
and a divine prerogative (in a more poetic and better
language that expresses what we are driving at: the
incongruity or the handicap is the childish shadow
and a divine prerogative); an imponderable that
determines the ultimate worth or worthlessness of a
61

Marie-Louise von Franz

personality.7
It is quite clear that Saint-Exupéry’s genius is that divine child in him.
He would not be such a genius or artist if he had not that capacity of
being absolutely naive and absolutely spontaneous. That is the source
of his creativity and at the same it is a little close to being something
worthless, something which devalues his personality, which is why in
my interpretation I am always skating between a negative and a
positive evaluation. It is both-in-one, and one does not quite know
how to judge it. One cannot judge it but must simply take it as a
contradictory factor, an imponderable thing. Here one could say that
there is an attempt by the unconscious to disentangle the two motifs.
The one would be definitely the infantile shadow, the lazy one who
just misses fighting the mother complex until it is too late. The other,
the star prince, would be the Self, something which tries to flow
toward the future, toward the possibility of being reborn, of finding a
new possibility of life after a crisis, or finding a renewal. Here the
unconscious attempts to show the two aspects separately so that
consciousness can realize it, because consciousness is too stupid to
realize a mixtum compositum. It generally needs to have it taken apart
first so that it can be put together again, because our consciousness is
made in such a way that it wants to separate things.
In my first lecture I spoke of the problem of neurosis of the
provisional life, namely, that people live in the expectation of being
able one day (not yet, but one day) which is very often linked up with
the savior complex. René Malamud has given me a copy of a paper by
Erich Fromm in which he speaks of this problem in detail I am taking
only an extract. He says:
If one believes in Time then one has no possibility of
sudden change, there is a constant expectation that
“in time” everything will come all right. If one is not
capable of solving a conflict one expects that “in
time” the conflicts will solve themselves, without one
having to risk a decision. You find that very often,
especially in believing in Time as far as one’s own
achievements are concerned. People comfort
themselves, not only because they do not really do
something but also for not making any preparation
7

“The Psychology of the Child Archetype,” The Archetypes and the Collective
Unconscious, CW 9i, pars. 299f.
62

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

for what they have to do, because for such things
there is plenty of time and therefore there is no need
to hurry. Such a mechanism is illustrated by the case
of a very gifted writer who wanted to write a book
which he thought would be the most important book
in world literature, but he did not do more than have
a few ideas as to what he would write and enjoy in
fantasy what the effect of his book would be and tell
his friends that he had not nearly finished it. In reality
he had not even written a single line, not a single
word; though according to him, he had already
worked for seven years on it. The older such people
get, the more they cling onto the illusion that one day
they will do it. In certain people the reaching of a
certain age, generally at the beginning of their forties,
brings a sobering effect so that they begin to use their
own forces, or there is a neurotic breakdown which is
based upon the fact that one cannot live if one does
not have that comforting time illusion.8
That is a vivd description of what I tried to express. H.G. Baynes wrote
about this long ago in his paper on the provisional life, as I have
mentioned.
The next part of this book I am going to read in detail.
Oh, little prince! Bit by bit I came to understand the
secrets of your sad little life…For a long time you had
found your entertainment in the quiet pleasure of
looking at the sunset. I learned that new detail on the
morning of the fourth day, when you said to me:
“I am very fond of sunsets. Come, let us go look at
a sunset now.”
“But we must wait,” I said.
“Wait? For what?”
“For the sunset. We must wait until it is time.”
At first you seemed to be very much surprised.
And then you laughed to yourself. You said to me:
“I am always thinking that I am at home!”
Just so. Everybody knows that when it is noon in
8

“Zum Gefühl der Ohnmacht” (The Feeling of Being Incapable of Doing
Anything), p.65)
63

Marie-Louise von Franz

the United States the sun is setting over France. If you
could fly to France in one minute, you could go
straight into the sunset, right from noon.
Unfortunately, France is too far away for that. But on
your tiny planet, my little price, all you need to do it
move your chair a few steps. You can see the day and
the twilight falling whenever you like…
“One day,” you said to me, “I saw the sunset fortyfour times!”
And a little later you added:
“You know—one loves the sunset, when one is so
sad…”
“Were you so sad, then,” I asked, “on the day of
the forty-four sunsets?”
But the little prince made no reply.
How would you interpret that?
Answer: It is a preview of his own early death?
Yes, you could say so—with the symbolic forty-four days. It is a
foreboding of his own death, and what else? It is the romantic way of
always thinking about death which is to be found early in youth. How
does the connect up with the rest of the problem?
Answer: There is nothing realistic about it. The thing keeps receding; he
sees the sunset over and over again.
Yes, it is a form of egotism, or narcissism, and that is the kind of
mood people get into when life is not flowing, when time is not filled
out, for when you are involved in inner or outer adventure you have
no time to look at the sunset, which might, however, be a restful
momentary beautiful experience, after a full day—the moment when
the peace of the evening comes to you. But then one does not generally
feel sad; it is because it has not been preceded by enough adventure.
Again, I think, it has to do with this tragedy of youth. People,
especially when they are young, are very much tortured by a kind of
boredom. I remember myself that between fourteen and eighteen I was
often very bored, but since then never. Outwardly, it was because one
had to stay for hours and hours in school instead of doing what one
liked. As soon as I was able to do what I liked, the boredom
disappeared. But boredom goes deeper than that. I have seen that,
strangely enough, very often it is a neurotic disease among young
people which lessens as they grow older. It has to do with the fact they
cannot yet do what they would really like to do. Therefore they do not
64

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

feel that they are in life. Boredom is just a subjective feeling of not
being in life. Actually there is no real boredom. At the university I still
had to follow boring courses, but then I learned how to amuse myself
at the same time. If you are inventive enough you can always avoid
boredom if you know how to put yourself into reality. One puts one’s
spontaneous fantasy into reality, and then boredom is forever gone.
Then life can be agreeable or disagreeable, exciting or not, but it is
certainly not boring anymore.
So boredom is a symptom of life being dammed up, that one does
not know how to get what one has within oneself into reality. If one
knows how to play, boredom goes. But there are children, and adults
also, who don’t know what to do, don’t know how to draw their inner
resources. In youth this is not so much a negative symptom because, to
some extent, it is a part of the situation, for they cannot yet fulfill
themselves.
The suffering of normal young people consists partly in the fact that
inwardly they are already very efficient, intelligent and grown-up, but
outwardly are not given the opportunity to use these capacities. They
are held back by society with the result that they are bored. I have
taught in schools myself, with pupils mainly between fourteen and
eighteen years old. I have often seen that many of the problems there
were due to the fact that many pupils were capable of reasonable
judgement and were inwardly rich and intelligent, but in the outer
situation, both at home and at school, they were treated as children
and did not have a chance. Naturally then life was dammed up, which
causes a kind of bored resistance against everything, with bad moods
and poor work. Generally, if one succeeded at getting those students
onto a higher level giving them more, and more intelligent, work and
more responsibility, the thing righted itself. They were artificially kept
below their level, with the result that a sulky boredom came up.
So one should aways say, “Just because you are bored, and just
because you are lazy, now you have to do a double amount of work;
but good stuff!” That puts an end to boredom! You know that between
the ages of sixteen and twenty suicide is very frequent and less so
afterward. People at that age often have that strange kind of
melancholy sadness, and they feel like old people. They have an
expression on their faces as if they knew all about life and felt very,
very old, so what would be the use of playing about with others, of
dancing with girls or with boys. They retire into a kind of
grandfatherly and grandmotherly attitude toward life. This is only a
65

Marie-Louise von Franz

symptom and simply a means that they have not found the clue to the
water of life, where they could find an issue for themselves, so they
drift on in this way. At that age it is technically difficult for people who
are a bit different from others to find out what would be their
personalities in life, and then life gets dammed up. Obviously we have
the same situation here with the child who constantly and sadly looks
at the sunset.
Next we learn that life on B-612 was not quite boring as we had
imagined, for Saint-Exupéry hears from the little prince that there is a
rose on the planet, that one day the seed of a rose came through space
and landed on the little planet and has slowly grown, until a lovely
rose has unfolded its beauty. Saint-Exupéry finds this out because the
little prince is suddenly terribly upset and constantly asks him if a
sheep will eat roses? If it does, then he can’t have sheep because it
must eat the baobab trees but not the rose! So, indirectly, through this
anxiety, the little prince gives away the fact that he has such a rose on
his planet. Then the description goes on:
But the shrub soon stopped growing, and began to
get ready to produce a flower. The little prince, who
was present at the first appearance of a huge bud, felt
at once that some sort of miraculous apparition must
emerge from it. But then the flower was not satisfied
to complete the preparations for her beauty in the
shelter of her green chamber. She chose her colors
with the greatest care. She dressed herself slowly. She
adjusted her petals one by one. She did not wish to go
out into the world all rumpled, like the field poppies.
It was only in the full radiance of her beauty that she
wishes to appear. Oh, yes! She was a coquettish
creature! And her mysterious adornment lasted for
days and days.
Then one morning, exactly at sunrise she suddenly
showed herself. And, after working with all this
painstaking precision, she yawned and said:
“Ah! I am scarcely awake. I beg that you will
excuse me. My petals are still all disarranged…”
But the little prince could not restrain his
admiration:
“Oh! How beautiful you are!”
“Am I not?” The flower responded, sweetly. “And
66

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

I was born at the same moment as the sun…”
The little prince could guess easily enough that she
was not any too modest—but how moving—an
exciting—she was!
“I think it is time for breakfast,” she added an
instant later. “If you would have the kindness to
think of my needs—“
And the little prince, completely abashed, went to
look for a sprinkling-can of fresh water. So, he tended
the flower.
So, too, she began very quickly to torment him
with her vanity—which was, if the truth be known, a
little difficult to deal with. One day, for instance,
when she was speaking of her four thorns, she said to
the little prince:
“Let the tiger come with their claws!”
There are no tigers on my planet,” the little prince
objected. “And, anyways, tigers do not eat weeds.”
“I am not a weed,” the flower replied, sweetly.
“Please excuse me…”
“I am not afraid at all of tigers,” she went on, “but I
have a horror of drafts. I suppose you wouldn’t have
a screen for me?”
“A horror of drafts—that is bad luck, for a plant,”
remarked the little prince, and added to himself,
“This flower is a very complex creature…”
“At night I want you to put me under a glass
globe. It is very cold where you live. In the place
where I was from—“
But she interrupted herself at that point. She had
come in the form of a seed. She could not have
known anything of any other world. Embarrassed
over having let herself be caught on the verge of such
a naive untruth, she coughed two or three times, in
order to put the little prince in the wrong.
“The screen?”
“I was just going to look for it when you spoke to
me…”
Then she forced her cough a little more so that he
should suffer from remorse just the same.
67

Marie-Louise von Franz

So the little prince, in spite of all the good will that
was inseparable from his love, had soon come to
doubt her. He had taken seriously words which were
without importance, and it made him very unhappy.
“I ought not to have listened to her,” he confided to
me one day. “One never ought to listen to the flowers.
One should simply look at them and breathe their
fragrance. Mine perfumed my planet. But I did not
know how to take pleasure in all her grace. This tale
of claws, which disturbed me so much, should only
have filled my heart with tenderness and pity.”
And he continued his confidences:
“The fact is that I did not know how to understand
anything! I ought to have judged by deeds and not by
words. She cast her fragrance and her radiance over
me. I ought never to have run away from her….I
ought to have guessed all the affection that lay
behind her poor little stratagems. Flowers are so
inconsistent! But I was too young to know how to
love her…”
You see very clearly that he alludes here to his experience of woman
and of the first anima projection and how difficult it was for him. He
gives away the fact that he was not up to the vanity and moods as well
as the charm and beauty of the rose. One of his wife’s names was Rosa,
and he married her in a very romantic mood himself. Because he
suffers too much from the moodiness of the rose he decides to leave
the planet, and seeing the migration of a flock of wild birds he decides
to catch hold of one and let himself be carried away, which is how he
came down to earth. So now we learn suddenly that he came to earth
because he could not stand the flower any longer. The moodiness and
all the difficulties with the haughty princess in this rose drove him
away from his planet. The rose is a bit sad too when he leaves, but she
does not show it. The book says:
On the morning of his departure he put his planet in
perfect order. He carefully cleaned out his active
volcanoes. He possessed two active volcanoes, and
they were very convenient for heating his breakfast in
the morning. He also had one volcano that was
extinct, too. If they are well cleaned out, volcanoes
burn slowly and steadily, without any eruptions.
68

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

Volcanic eruptions are like fires in a chimney.
On our earth we are obviously much too small to
clean out our volcanoes. That is why they bring no
end of trouble upon us.
The little prince also pulled up, with certain sense
of dejection, the last little shoots of the baobabs. He
believed that he would never want to return. But on
this last morning all these familiar tasks seemed very
precious to him. And when he watered the flower for
the last time, and prepared to place her under the
shelter of her glass globe, he realized that he was very
close to tears.
“Good-bye,” he said to the flower.
But she made no answer.

69

Marie-Louise von Franz

”Good-bye,” he said again.
The flower coughed. But it was not because she
had a cold.
“I have been silly,” he said at last. “I ask for your
forgiveness. Try to be happy…”
He was surprised by this absence of reproaches.
He stood there all bewildered, the glass globe held
arrested in mid-air. He did not understand this quiet
sweetness.
“Of course I love you,” the flower said to him. “It
is my fault that you have not know it all the while.
That is of no importance. But you—you have been
just as foolish as I. Try to be happy…Let the glass
70

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

globe be. I don’t want it anymore.”
“But the wind—“
“My cold is not so bad as all that…The cool night
air will do me good. I am a flower.”
“But the animals—“
“Well, I must endure the presence of two or three
caterpillars if I wish to become acquainted with the
butterflies. It seems that they are very beautiful. And
if not the butterflies—and the caterpillars—who will
call upon me? You will be far away… As for the large
animals—I am not at all afraid of any of them. I have
my claws.”
And, naively, she showed her four thorns. Then
she added:
“Don’t linger like this. You have decided to go
away. Now go!”
For she did not want him to see her crying. She
was such a proud flower…
That is an absolutely perfect description of a lover’s relationship where
each tortures the other. Both suffer in their inner hearts and are too
proud to make a gesture of reconciliation, or don’t know how to—
negatively, animus and anima opposed to each other. On account of
lack of human feeling and lack of experience of life, such young people
often don’t know how to bridge the momentary quarrel. That is the
fate of many early love affairs. It is also a magnificent description of
the vanity and moodiness of the typical anima. The anima woman
generally has a certain amount of infantile moodiness, that kind of
irrational behavior, and especially male men like this type of woman.
She is a compensation for the continuity of their conscious life, but
there is an intolerable kind of childishness in such behavior. The rose
is, in other ways, as infantile as the little prince, and therefore they
have to be separated.
In antiquity the rose belonged to the cult of the goddess Venus and
of her divine child Eros (Cupid). Roses were also used in the Dionysian
mysteries, for Dionysius too is naturally an image of the early dying
youth. In the cult of Isis, Venus and Isis are the main goddesses. In
Christianity, therefore the symbol of the rose became split into two
aspects: it became a symbol of the Virgin Mary and heavenly love and,
on the other hand, of earthly lust—the Venus aspect. There is one
medieval author who says of the thorns “thus the pleasure of love
71

Marie-Louise von Franz

never lack a bitter sting.” The Christian assimilation of antique
symbolism generally goes this way: It is cut into two, one part being
ascribed to the devil and the negative aspect, and the other to the
positive aspect. Whereas in antiquity and in pre-Christian times the
positive and negative aspects were more closely linked together, in the
light of Christian consciousness the two have been separated. This is
why most symbols in medieval books are contradictory: the lion is a
symbol of the devil, the lion is a symbol of Christ; the rose is a symbol
of the Virgin Mary, the rose is a symbol of earthly lust; the dove is a
symbol of the Holy Ghost, the dove is a symbol of lust, etc.
You can go through the whole list of symbols and find the opposite
in them all. The rose has four thorns and is in the form of a mandala
and therefore is also a symbol of the Self and very often, in
mythological symbolism, the place of an inner mystical transformation.
But here, the the star child, the rose represents a too underdeveloped
and too infantile aspect of the anima, and therefore the two have to be
separated from each other in order to become mature. At present they
are only an anticipation of the inner totality, not yet the realization.
There are many fairy tales in which a pair of children are persecuted
by a stepmother. This occurs in “Little Red Riding Hood” and the fairy
tale entitled “Little Brother and Little Sister,” and others. Generally,
one of the two is killed and then transformed by a spell and redeemed
by the other partner. There is this same type of child-myth also in
classical Greek mythology. For instance, there is the story of the two
children of Nephele (cloud). Mrs. Cloud, so to speak, has two children,
Phrixos and Helle. Cloud’s two children are persecuted by their
stepmother, and they fly away through the air on a golden ram, but
Helle falls into the sea and dies. The brother, Phrixos, escapes and later
sacrifices the ram whose fleece is fastened to a tree. This is the original
myth of the Golden Fleece. Nowadays members of the Maltese order
wear the fleece as a golden chain around their necks. The golden ram
whose fleece was nailed to a tree was compared to Christ sacrificed
and nailed to the cross, which explains why the Golden Fleece was
looked on as a symbol of Christ and why it came to play such a special
role in the Maltese Order.
One could say that all these motifs of a couple of children, a little
brother and sister, who are always partly killed and partly restored to
life, are images of the inner totality of a man which in its infantile
perforation has to be cut away so the ego consciousness may mature.
The two are later reunited in a higher form, which explains why the
72

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

rose drives the little prince away from the planet. If we look at it as a
portrai of Saint-Exupéry, then it can be said that his inner genius (that
would be the little prince) was tormented by his anima moods, and
that the aim of this suffering is to mature the too infantile nucleus of
his personality. It could be expressed even more simply by saying that
if someone is infantile then he will suffer from terrific emotional
moods—ups and downs—being constantly hurt, and that is right,
because as long as one is childish there is only one cure, that of
suffering. When one has suffered long enough, one develops; there is
no way around this problem. The childish nucleus is inevitably
tortured.
Question: If these rose had cried, instead of trying to hide her tears from
him, would there have been a possibility of both maturing?
Yes. If they could have talked over the trouble and exchanged their
sorrow and not hidden it by a wrong kind of pride, then they could
have matured together. But if you are not mature then you cannot talk
about it. Again and again one sees that every time the childish spot is
touched, people begin to cry. For years people hide their childish spot
in analysis, not out of dishonesty or because they repress it, but when
in the end it comes out they say that they knew they would start to cry,
so what was the good of mentioning it, because crying would end
every conversation. Because they know this, they shelve the problem
all the time, but that way it does not develop.
That is the great difficulty, for the sore spot has to come out, and has
to be tortured; that is the only way by which it can mature. It is even
more dangerous when the childish side is cut off. Such people do not
show it, but you always have the feeling when with them that they are
not quite genuine, and when you have established sufficient contact to
talk to them and can tell them they are never really quite themselves,
that there is something not quite genuine, then come the tears! They
don’t know what to do about it because they would be genuine only if
they cried, and they naturally do not want to cry. That is a form in
which infantilism comes up, or the infantile shadow always makes
exaggerated feeling demands on the partner.
Repression does not solve the problem, for the repressed child
continues to cry or be angry in the corner. So it must not be split off.
One should keep close to it and not lose contact with it for that would
be losing contact with one’s genuine personality. But one cannot let it
out either. In my experience, it has simply to be tortured and suffer on
and on until suddenly it grows up. If a man has an infantile anima, he
73

Marie-Louise von Franz

has to go through a tremendous amount of feeling trouble and
disappointments. When he has gone through them enough he begins
to know women and himself and then he is really emotionally grown
up. But if he pretends to be reasonable and represses his childishness,
then there is no development. So it is even better to expose one’s
childishness so that it may be tortured than to be too reasonable and
hide it away, because then it only gets stuck. It is better to behave like a
child and be hit over the head by one’s surroundings and those people
with whom one is in touch all the time, because then one suffers and
the prima materia slowly transforms. That is the great problem which
the infantile shadow—the divine child—puts upon one.
Remark: In the Visions Seminars, Jung expressed the same thing when he
said that people who have difficulty in getting near their center only really
experience themselves when they suffer, when they come to the experience of
their real self, and it does not seem possible for them to get there any other
way.
Yes. I would therefore say that the child in the adult is the source of
suffering; it is that which suffers because with the grown-up part of
oneself one can take life as it is and therefore one does not suffer so
much. The suffering of childhood are the worst—that is the real
suffering—though they may be over minor trifles, perhaps the child
has to go to bed when it wants to go on playing. We can all remember
the catastrophic disappointments one had as a child. Looking back
they appear to be trifles, but in childhood, in that moment, it was an
agony of suffering, because a child is whole, and total in its reactions.
Therefore, even if only a toy is taken away, it is as though the whole
world were destroyed. Thank God, there is the compensation that five
minutes later the child can be distracted and laugh again and has
forgotten it all. But in childhood there are such terrific tragedies, which
shows that the child within is the genuine part, and the genuine part is
that thing which suffers, that thing which cannot take reality, or which
still reacts in the grown-up person like a child, saying “I want it all,
and if I don’t get it then it is the end of the world. Everything is lost.”
And that is what the genuine kernel of the person remains like and
that is the source of suffering. So one could say that what is genuine in
a person and what is naive like a child in them is the source of
suffering. Many grown-ups split off this part and thereby miss
individuation, for only if one accepts it and the suffering it imposes on
one, can the process on individuation go on.
Saint-Exupéry’s wife seems to have been a relatively hysterical
74

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

person with tremendous moods, so that he quarreled with her so badly
that he left her for quite a while and lived with another woman who
taught him how to make opium. It is also remarkable, and sheds some
light, from the personal angle, on the tragedy expressed in the book,
that Saint-Exupéry’s mother disliked his wife and took a tremendous
liking to the woman who taught him to smoke opium. Even though
she poisoned her son with opium his mother preferred her to the wife!
Now that is quite revealing!

75

Lecture 4

There is a little intermezzo in the book which gives us further
information about Asteroid B-612, namely, that on it there are three
volcanoes, two active and one extinct. Every morning when the little
prince gets up he cleans the three because, he says, “One never
knows.” In the picture he is just cleaning one of the volcanoes, while
another, where there is a pan with a handle, he is cooking his breakfast.
Then there is the flower under its glass and on the extinct volcano a
little cap, because it does not work. Thus there are four landmarks on
his asteroid: three volcanoes and a flower. It is a mandala. How would
you interpret this extinct volcano? One speaks of people as being like a
volcano.
Answer: They have emotional eruptions.
Yes, it would be someone inclined to emotional eruptions, someone
with a hot temperament and a lot of emotion which bursts out at any
time. So if one of the volcanoes is extinct, how would you interpret
that?
Answer: Perhaps he has overcome one corner of his emotions.
You are an optimist! I think if he had overcome it, it would not look
like that. When a volcano becomes extinct, crust upon crust has formed
within, so that the fiery kernel of the earth is covered over with
material and its activity does not burst out the same way. Therefore
this does not look to me as though something has been overcome but
as if the possibility of expression and of the emergence of the inner fire
were closed up. The central fire of the asteroid has faded out in that
particular corner. What would that mean in reality? It is a very
catastrophic picture.
Answer: The libido has gone!
76

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

Yes, there is no way for the energy to come out, not even by a
negative eruption. You could also say that if a volcano dies out on a
heavenly body that would mean that the central fire was slowly
burning down and fading away, that the earth was in a process of
dying or getting colder, and that the inner process of transformation of
the material which is within is slowing down and becoming less
intense. I think we have to look at it in conjunction with the small size
of the planet, the smallness of the earth on which the elephants cannot
stand. There is again a hint of vital weakness, of the vitality which is
giving out in some corner, and with the the capacity for a direct
emotional reaction. The image of an extinct volcano often appears in
psychotic material, illustrating what might be described as a postpsychotic state. People in a psychosis have tremendous emotional
explosions after which there comes the regressive restoration of the
persona,9 when such people are literally comparable to a burnt-out
volcano. They are reasonable, adapted, back in life, but the fire has
gone. Something has been burnt out by the previous destructive
explosion. If you treat such post-psychotic cases you notice that when
certain really important problems are touched upon, there is no
reaction. Usually, if one gets close to a person’s vital problem, things
get hot: people get excited and nervous, and they begin to lie, to blush,
or to become aggressive—there is some sort of emotional reaction.
With a post-psychotic state this is not so, for just when one might
expect things to get really hot, there is a matter of fact: “Yes, yes, I
know!” There is no reaction exactly when it might be expected to be
really painful. That could be expressed by the simile of the burnt-out
fire. The destruction has been so great that the fire has disappeared.
The dreams then may show a burnt-out volcano, symbolic of the postdestruction condition.
On a minor scale, one experiences the same thing after expressive
strong affect. You have all probably experienced the awful come-down
after letting out a very strong affect: fatigue and indifference. All
reaction has been exhausted and one is burnt out. Here the destruction
is only partial, for only one of the four things is burnt out, one of the
three volcanoes, is extinct. We might compare these with the four
functions and then it would mean that one function has given out. The
flower would probably stand for feeling, in which case the opposite

9

See Two Essays on Analytical Psychology, CW 7, pars. 254ff, 471ff.
77

Marie-Louise von Franz

would be thinking, where the volcano is the biggest and is well drawn.
Then we have to find out which of the other is burnt out. From his
type, I would say that it is probably sensation and the touch with
reality. However, I do not think that explanation through the functions
is very relevant. It alludes probably to another problem.
Saint-Exupéry had a little brother whom he was very fond and who
died between the ages of six and seven. That was a great shock which
he never quite got over. This child is very much mirrored in the whole
story of the little prince, and I think that Saint-Exupéry consciously
had him in mind when he wrote it. From him the child who came
down to earth and then left it again was associated with the trauma of
the death of a little brother, with whom he had a very good contact and
who died. That, I think, probably has to do with the shock that burnt
his personality and from which he did not quite recover. It is as though
part of his infantile personality had died at the same time as the child
who died in real life. Afterward Saint-Exupéry was only a half, so that
the dead little brother is a picture, probably, of part of his masculinity,
of his capacity for reaction, which died at the same time. The little
prince would thus be an exterior image of what happened within
himself, a projection of something which is dead and split off in SaintExupéry.
Question: How old was he when his brother died?
Saint-Exupéry died at the age of forty-four and was born in 1900. I
believe he was two or three years older than his brother, so he must
have been about eight or nine at the time. He was still a boy, but old
enough fully to realize that catastrophe of the death of the child who
probably succumbed under the pressure of the unfavorable family
situation. From Saint-Exupéry’s standpoint he would be the one who
could not stand the atmosphere and had to leave the earth because he
could not come down into this world. The fact that the little prince
always cleans the dead volcano because “one never knows” shows that
there is a faint hope that it might become active again. I think this
confirms our idea there there is a basic vital weakness, or destruction,
in the deeper layers of the psychological earth in Saint-Exupéry, which
ultimately was responsible for the fact that he could not get over the
crisis of the middle of life, an inability which is normal for the puer
aeternus .
The little prince leaves Asteroid B-612 and, holding onto a flock of
birds, travels through space. He does not come to earth directly, but
visits six neighboring asteroids, which he explores. This does not seem
78

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

to me to be a very important part so I will only discuss it briefly. On
the first asteroid there is a king who gives silly and completely
ineffectual orders which nobody obeys. To save face, he finds out what
is about to happen, such as when the sun is about to set and then
orders the sun to set. (I do the same thing with my dog, who never
obeys me, so if I want to show how obedient he is I tell him to do
something which he is going to do anyway and then say, “See how
well he obeys me!”) This king is very clever in doing this. Obviously
Saint-Exupéry is here making fun of the inefficiency of the power
complex and of those false pretensions which are up against reality as
it is. You could call these six figures which the little prince now meets
shadow figures, or some of his inner possibilities of adaptation to the
reality of Saint-Exupéry, but we will go into that later.
On the next planet is a man who only wants admiration—he is a
personification of vanity. On the third planet is a drunkard who drinks
because he is so ashamed of being a drunkard and tries to drown his
sorrows in this way. On the fourth asteroid is a business man who does
nothing but count his star coins; the stars represent coins to him and he
counts them all day long. The fifth is, to my mind the most interesting.
This asteroid is very small, and on it is a lamp-lighter who has to light
his lamp every evening and put it out in the morning, as was formerly
the case in big cities. (In London they have now stopped budgeting for
lamp-lighters—something quite typically English—it having been
discovered recently that the allocation was still being made, though for
many years there had not been any lamps that needed lighting!) By
some unfortunate development, this particular planet has become
much smaller and rotates much more quickly so that when the little
prince sees him he has to light and extinguish his lamp once every
minute. On the sixth planet is a geographer who tells the little prince
about the earth and says he should visit it.
The idea that the little prince should visit a number of planets before
he goes down to earth is interesting because it is a variation of an
archetypal motif. In some gnostic philosophical systems influenced by
Platonic ideas it was believed that the soul was a spark which lived in
heaven and that when born it had to descend through all the spheres
of the planets, each of which invested it with some quality. Afterward
the soul was born in a human body on earth, where it lived an earthly
life with the fortunate and unfortunate dispositions which it had
received from the planets on the way down. The idea was linked up
with astrology, for in heaven the soul spark was beyond astrology, and
79

Marie-Louise von Franz

it was only the descent from heaven to earth that the human soul
acquired its horoscope: from Venus an attribute of Venus in a certain
constellation, from Mars a certain quality of that planet in a certain
constellation, and so on, with the result that on reaching the earth each
human had a specific horoscope. One death the soul returned upward,
giving back the qualities (sometimes symbolized as clothes) which it
had received on the way down. Thus it arrived naked at the heavenly
gates and returned into the eternal light. So the soul after death had to
get rid of the planetary influences.
It can therefore be said that the soul spark is a symbol of the Self and
different planetary qualities are the inherited psychological and
instinctual disposition with which the human being is born, having
received aggressive instincts from Mars and sexual instinct from
Venus, in all their aspects, etc., as well as psychological and spiritual
qualities. Later on I shall bring material in which the same idea is seen
in the dreams of a typical puer aeternus who has to come down to earth
and first goes through the region of the stars. This illustrates the idea
that Saint-Exupéry has not yet entered the just-so-ness of his
personality, his earthly disposition, but keeps away from his own body
and his own emotional disposition. In that way he is not really himself
in the mundane sense of the word, but spiritually he is more himself.
One could thus understand the king, the vain man, the drunkard,
and the businessman, I think, in a parallel way and call them all
possibilities of the future grown man. He describes them all in a rather
mocking way, again making fun of the adult life. He says that one
prays to save money, another to nonexistent power, and a third
indulges in quixotic activity, painting old values which are no longer
valid. The king could be said to represent something which he could
have lived, also the vain man, for Saint-Exupéry was very vain, as
confirmed by several reporters, who met him and said he was a bit of a
posuer—he had a certain amount of self-reflecting vanity. He could
have also taken to drink. The business man I cannot quite imagine, but
perhaps that was possible too. So, with the exception of the lamplighter, the different planet dwellers represent ordinary possibilities of
becoming grown-up in a wrong way, or an endeavor to find a pseudostyle of grown-up existence.
I think the lamp-lighter is most interesting because, if Saint-Exupéry
had followed the family tradition, he would have turned into such a
Don Quixote personality. There are many such types in the higher
French nobility; they simply live on the past glories of France, having
80

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

got stuck in the eighteenth century with all the ideals of the gentleman
and chivalry and a solid Catholic background. They are peculiarly out
of step as regards present-day life. The poet Lavarande, a
contemporary colleague of Saint-Exupéry, obviously suffered such a
fate. He wrote novels in praise of the “good old times” of chivalry and
nobility. But I think Saint-Exupéry was too sensitive and intelligent
and, in a way, too much of a modern Man to accept such a regressive
form of life. As he shows in the lamp-lighter, the pace of life has
accelerated too much and does not allow for the gentleman-farmer or
the nobility-officer ideal any more; such roles have become ridiculous
and an illusion. This shows how difficult is the position of the poet, for
he cannot find any given form of life which would suit him and offer
him a collective pattern in which to fulfill himself. A more positive
figure is the geographer. Saint-Exupéry was very fond of geography,
something which a pilot must know very well. This geographer could
be described as a psychological function of orientation, a capacity for
finding and mapping the way on earth, so he is a more positive figure
than the others. Power, money, public applause and drink symbolize
four things which Saint-Exupéry cannot make his god, or to which he
cannot pray. There remains the lamp-lighter, of whom he says, “That
man is the only one of them all whom I could have made my friend.
But his planet is indeed too small. There is no room on it for two
people.” That is something which tempted him for minute but he
rejected that also. Then comes the relatively positive figure of the
geographer.
The story goes on:
So then the seventh planet was the Earth.
The Earth is not just an ordinary planet! One can
count, there, 111 kings (not forgetting, to be sure, the
Negro kings among them), 7,000 geographers,
900,000 businessmen, 7,500,000 tipplers, 311,000,000
conceited men—that is to say 2,000,000,000 grownups.
There he states quite clearly what he thinks about grown-up people on
the earth, where he now arrives. The first thing he meets is a snake.
When the little prince arrived on the Earth, he was
very much surprised not to see any people. He was
beginning to be afraid he had come to the wrong
planet, when a coil of gold, the color of the
moonlight, flashed across the sand.
81

Marie-Louise von Franz

“Good evening,” the little prince said courteously.
“Good evening,” said the snake.
“What planet is this on which I have come down?”
asked the little prince.
“This is the Earth; this is Africa,” the snake
answered.
“Ah! Then there are no people on the Earth?”
“This is the desert. There are no people in the
desert. The Earth is large,” said the snake.
The little prince sat down on a stone, and raised his
eyes toward the sky.
“I wonder,” he said, “whether the stars are set
alight in heaven so that one day each of us may find
his own way again…Look at my planet. It is right
there above us. But how far away it is!”
“It is beautiful,” that snake said. “What has
brought you here?”
“I have been having some trouble with a flower,”
said the little prince.
“Ah!” Said the snake.
And they were both silent.
“Where are the men?” The little prince at last took
up the conversation again. “It is a little lonely in the
desert…”
“It is also lonely among men,” the snake said.
The little prince gazed at him for a long time.
“You are a funny animal,” he said at last. “You are
no thicker than a finger…”
“But I am more powerful than the finger of a
king,” said the snake.
The little prince smiled. “You are not very
powerful. You haven’t even any feet. You cannot even
travel…”
“I can carry you further than any ship could take
you,” said the snake.
He twined himself around the little prince’s ankle,
like a golden bracelet.
“Whomever I touch, I send back to the earth from
whence they came,” the snake spoke again. “But you
are innocent and true, and you come from a star…”
82

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

The little prince made no reply.
“You move me to pity—you are so weak on this
Earth made of granite,” the snake said. “I can help
you, some day, if you grow too homesick for your
own planet. I can—“
“Oh! I understand you very well,” said the little
prince. “But why do you always speak in riddles?”
“I solve them all,” said the snake.
And they were both silent.
How would you interpret the golden snake? What does it offer the
little prince?
Answer: Help.
Yes, and in what form?
Answer: Death.
Yes, it is the temptation to die; it offers help in the form of a way in
which to commit suicide. The snake says that he can send people back
to the earth from whence they came. He suggests that the earth is too
hard for the little prince, that he will not be able to stand it, but that he,
the snake, can help, meaning the snake can send him back. The snake
says that he can solve all riddles, for death solves all problems. It is a
death temptation; it offers a way by which to get out of life, an ultimate
solution to an insoluble problem. The offer is quite clear: the snake
would kill with its poison, which is what happens at the end of the
book. Before we go into the specific quality of the snake here, namely,
as the temptation of death or the helpfulness of death, we should see
what it represents in general.
Like all animals, the snake represents a part of the instinctive
psyche, a part removed from consciousness. Jung says this about the
snake:
The lower vertebrates have from the earliest times
been favorite symbols of the collective psychic
substratum, which is localized anatomically in the
sub-cortical centers, the cerebellum and the spinal
cord. These organs constitute the snake. Snakedreams usually occur, therefore, when the conscious
mind is deviating from its instinctual basis.10
When a snake dream occurs, it is a signal that consciousness is
10

‘The Psychology of the Child Archetype,” The Archetypes and the Collective
Unconscious, CW 9i, par. 282
83

Marie-Louise von Franz

especially far away from instinct. It shows that the conscious attitude is
not natural and that there is an artificial dual personality which
appears to be, in some ways, too well adapted and too much fascinated
by the outer world and, at the same time, inclined to fail hopelessly in
decisive moments. In such as a case, Jung continues, we find that there
always exists a sort of secret attraction to the missing inner double,
which one both fears and loves as the thing that could make one
whole. That is why the snake in mythology is essentially double. It
arouses fear, brings death, and poisons; it is an enemy of light and at
the same time a savior in animal form—a symbol of the Logos and of
Christ. When it appears in the latter form, it represents the possibility
of becoming conscious and whole. Instead of intellectual
understanding, it promises knowledge born from immediate inner
experience: insight, secret wisdom—gnosis.
You can see that the snake in our story has the same double role. It
offers to kill the little prince and free him from the weight of the earth,
which can be understood into ways—as suicide, or the good fortune of
getting rid of life. It is this ultimate philosophical attitude which says
that death is not a catastrophe or a misfortune but an escape at last
from an intolerable reality, which may be looked upon as something
unimportant that yet hampers one’s innermost being.
The snake appears very often in ancient mythology combined with
the motif of the child. For instance, the mythical god of the Athenians
was King Erechteus, who was the son of Athene. As a little child he
was kept in a basket onto which one should not look, for one saw a
child surrounded by snakes. Quite what it means one cannot be sure,
but in southern France coffrets gnostiques have been found (probably
material from the Middle Ages and not earlier) in which naked
children are playing with snakes. So the child-god and the snake-god
are often combined. Also the child-god is the archetype of the poisoner,
so to speak.
You know that Cupid of antiquity has a very poisonous arrow with
which he can even subdue—as the poets say—the great god Zeus, for
if Cupid shoots an arrow at him, Zeus may have to pursue without
hope and earthly woman though he may not even like the situation. So
Cupid has the capacity to poison people. Many late poems of antiquity,
so-called anakreontika, in a light way make fun of this little boy who,
with his poisonous arrow, can subdue the whole world to his will. If
cupid shoots and arrow at you and you fall in love, whether you like it
or not depends to a certain extent your own reaction. If you do, you
84

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

will be happy and say that you have fallen in love. But if you do not,
then you will say that you have been poisoned and are made to do
something you do not like, forced into a situation which the ego feels
like subjection or poison. So there is a secret connection between the
snake and the eternal child.
The snake is the shadow of the little prince himself, his dark side. In
a way, therefore, if the snake offers to poison him, it means the
integration of the shadow, but unfortunately it takes place in the self
and not in Saint-Exupéry. This means that the whole thing happens in
the unconscious and moves to the psychological nucleus away from
reality again. It is really Saint-Exupéry who should have been
poisoned; that would have detached him from the little prince. It is
likely that when his little brother died, he was told that his brother was
now an angel in heaven and quite happy not to have to live on this
earth, and so on, and that Saint-Exupéry believed this more than others
might have done. He took it in and realized that death was only partly
a misfortune and that possibly created in him his very detached and
philosophical attitude toward life.
The puer aeternus very often has this mature, detached attitude
toward life, which is normal for old people but which he acquires
prematurely—the idea that life is not everything, that the other side is
valid too, that life is only part of the whole existence. Here the deathtemptation prevents the little prince from going right to earth. Before
he has even touched it the snake comes in and says, “If you don’t like
it, you know a way out.” So before he has gone down to earth, he
already has the offer of death. I have met many people with a similar
difficulty constellation who do that: they live only “on condition,”
which means that secretly they constantly flirt with the idea of suicide.
At every step of their lives they think they will try something or other
and that if it does not work they will kill themselves. The puer aeternus
always keeps his revolver in his pocket and constantly plays with the
idea of getting out of life if things get too hard. The disadvantage of
this is that he is never quite committed to the situation as a whole
human being there is a constant Jesuitical mental reservation: “I will go
into this, but I reserve my right as a human being to kill myself if I
can’t stand it anymore. I shall not go through the whole experience to
the bitter end if it becomes too insufferable, for if it does I shall walk
out of it.” And therefore the person does not become whole. If one cuts
off the wholeness of the experience, one cuts oneself into bits and
remains split because transformation can only take place if one gives
85

Marie-Louise von Franz

oneself completely to the situation.
On a minor scale this can be found when people have been in
analysis for years, but with a lot of mental reservations tucked away in
some overcoat pocket which are never put on the table, never brought
into the analytical process. Therefore it remains always slightly
conditional and not quite “it.” You wonder why it does not go further.
If there is such a sticking place you generally find that in a woman it is
made by the animus and in the man by the anima, who just kept
something out. For example, “Oh well, this is just analysis, but life is
something different,” or “This is an analytical relationship. One has to
stand by one’s transference, but it does not quite count; it is different
from other relationships,” and so on. Such secret detaching thoughts
prevent the whole thing from ever being quite whole. One plays the
role of the analysand and goes through the process seemingly honestly,
but one secret is not given up, and with some people it is actually the
idea of suicide. Until this idea is revised through some inner process,
nothing is quite real. If you live with the idea that you might escape
life, then the possibility of total living is lamed, for one needs to be
totally involved with all one’s feelings.
The snake is very clever, for just when the little prince arrives on
earth and might get involved with reality, it sneaks up and says, “Oh,
you see, life is very hard and it is very lonely on earth. I have a secret, I
can help you out of it.” It is very ambiguous. I think the most
poisonous aspect of this problem is that one does not notice that one
has such a mental reservation: it has one; one is possessed by it.
Sometimes one can only notice it indirectly. If one asks oneself why
one is not living completely. “Why am I cut off from life? Why is
everything not quite real all the time?” Then you can be pretty sure
that either the animus or the anima has put something between you
and reality in a very clever way. In a man, it is generally through the
mother complex. For that is like a plastic envelope between him and
reality so that he is never really quite in touch; nothing quite counts as
the present moment. With a woman, it is the animus who whispers
something at the back of her mind, some kind of “nothing but”
remark.
Question: How does the animus work in a woman?
Suppose you get in touch with a woman toward whom you feel
warmly, to which she seems to respond, but all the time you have the
feeling that you can’t quite get through to her feeling. It might be your
fault, but perhaps you are quite sure that is not the reason. It is difficult
86

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

for me to describe because I am a woman myself, so I am not in the
situation of a man who is wooing a woman. But it may happen that a
woman comes to me who seems to have a positive attitude. She does
not appear to lie but hands me her whole material and seems to have
confidence in me. But all the time I have an uncanny impression that
the thing is not sticking together somehow. I then feel that if a
catastrophe happened, if there should be a chance of this woman
snapping or committing suicide, that—to express it symbolically—we
are not attached to each other. Such a person might suddenly write to
say she was interrupting the analysis for some reason—because she
was going away, or for lack of money, or some other reason, or pseudoreason—and then you are just left completely nonplussed.
Question: But how do you account for that?
It is the father complex plus an animus possession. I remember the
case of a young girl with whom I had I had very good contact, but one
day she came and attacked me in a most horrible way. When I broke
through she collapsed and it come out that she had made up her mind
to commit suicide and this way to be a good-bye quarrel. She wanted
to kill her feeling for me so that she could commit suicide. That came
absolutely out of the blue. The contact the day before had been very
good, nothing had happened in our relationship, but for some reason
she had enough of her difficulties in life and secretly made up her
mind to commit suicide. But then she thought that her feeling for me
was something which stood between her and suicide, so she made up
her mind to behave so nastily to me that I would have enough of her
and then she would be free to go. That was an idea which had
suddenly stung her like a snake-bite.
Question: But would that have been conscious to her?
I had warned her. She had a dream which said that an old man was
rattling autonomously around on a child’s red bicycle. This old man
was a suicidal drunkard. So I knew she had a father-animus figure
who was linked up with childish emotion—the child’s red bicycle—
and that was rattling around autonomously at the back of her psyche.
Though I interpreted the dream and told her that something in her was
like that, she could not get it; she looked at me blankly, but then one
day it broke through. This is what happens when there are snake
dreams. Then one has to expect that people will act out of the blue.
A man who has a lot of snake dreams, after fifteen years of marriage
suddenly made up his mind from one minute to another to divorce his
wife without even talking to her about it first. He might perhaps have
87

Marie-Louise von Franz

done such a thing after one year’s marriage, but not after fifteen! I had
met him the week before when everything was okay, and the next
week the whole thing was done and the lawyer was in charge. For
fifteen years he had lived with her, and apart from animus-anima
trouble, which was not worse than in many other cases, it had been all
right. But there was the snake in him! I had always warned him to
watch out for either committing suicide or something else when such
ideas got hold of him. The snake indicates the capacity for cold fits in
which some instinctive action can be taken. I think that in that case the
divorce was not wrong in itself, or possibly not, or at least it was
something to be seriously considered, but what was absolutely
inhuman was the sudden cold fit. The idea has not occurred to him
before, and then he made up his mind and arranged the whole thing
with his lawyer within twenty-four hours! Naturally, his wife could
rightly complain that this was inhuman, for it was. He could have
discussed it with her, saying that their marriage had become a habit
without any meaning in it any more, or something like that, so as to
prepare her emotionally for the shock, but he did not even do as much
as that.
The girl who wanted to commit suicide did do something more, for
she had at least wanted a good-bye quarrel. She was more related, for
she did not just go and commit suicide but tried to first ruin our
relationship; that was a gesture of relatedness. If someone even rings
up and says, “I am going to commit suicide, but I just wanted to say
good-bye,” that is human; one part of the personality is still outside the
snake. What really had got her was the old man on the child’s bicycle,
and that is why I said that with a woman it was connected with the
animus, and in that case also with the father-image, which was very
negative. The old man showed the unrelatedness. He ran along
autonomously and she was doing the same thing. I told her I thought
that if she committed suicide, her ghost would hover over her corpse
and be very sorry! It would have been a suicide motivated by an affect.
Remark: Such a situation would bring the problem of life and death into
consciousness, and the committal would have to take place then in order to
resolve that, would it not?
Yes, if that comes up, then one has to make up one’s mind
consciously. I did not tell her to commit suicide; I told her not to do it
so rashly under the compulsion of an affect. It was not a mature
decision. She should just think it over, and if she really had made up
her mind to commit suicide then it would not matter if she wanted to
88

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

wait another week, when she could do it after having come to a
definite decision. That would be a reasonable mature decision, but she
should not do it in the middle of an affect and then regret it after—if
that is possible! The immaturity of the sudden decision for selfdestruction was wrong; a week’s delay would have caused her to
question whether she really wanted to die or not.
Many people live involuntarily and have never made-up their mind
about that question; that is very dangerous. When you get in touch
with such people, you realize a constant secret mental reservation. If
you tell them, they do not understand and just shake their heads, for it
is completely autonomous. The person never seems to be quite present.
There is always something evasive. In the case of the girl when crisis
came, she and I then caught the man on the bicycle. He had always
worked at the back of her mind, always making everything not quite
true. With men the mother complex has exactly the same effect, except
that in a way it is even more difficult to catch because it does not form
itself in the man’s mind as an idea. The girl had the definite idea of
killing herself and that life was not worth while; it was a kind of
reflection. But the mother complex form that is manifested in a
depressive mood, a “nothing but” mood, something completely vague
and intangible. Especially men with a negative mother complex have
it, particularly when something goes well (say that they find a
girlfriend who suits them or are successful in their professional life.)
You might expect them to look a bit happier, instead they look pale and
say, “Yes, but…” But they cannot express the mood in words. There is a
childish state of constant dissatisfaction with themselves and the
whole of reality. That is something very difficult to catch, and it is very
infectious; one gets depressed oneself by it and cannot even react. It is
like a wet blanket over everything.
Saint-Exupéry is an example of the irritated bad mood. He had
moods where he just paced up and down his flat the whole day, smoke
one cigarette after another and just feeling annoyed, annoyed with
himself and everything else in the world. That is how the mother
complex comes out in a man, in those snarling disagreeable moods, or
in a flat depression. It is an anti-life reaction and has to do with the
mother.
With Saint-Exupéry there is also the tendency to take opium. As a
member of the class he just pointed out to me, the whole psychology of
the drug taker is connected with the idea of flirting with death, getting
away from reality and its hardships. Generally, people who take drugs
89

Marie-Louise von Franz

have quite a lot of snake dreams. The poisonous snakes make them
poison themselves, which is because they do not know, or do not see,
how to get out of their split in some other way. Alcohol also sometimes
goes along with this problem, for that also acts as a drug. You will
remember that I told you that Saint-Exupéry had a relationship with a
woman who taught him to smoke opium and that his mother
especially liked this woman. Se there one sees a direct connection
between the negative mother and the tendency to poison oneself. To
Saint-Exupéry, flying, or drugs, represented the two possibilities of
getting rid of those irritated depressive moods, but he never got
through the mood. He tried to switch out of it, either by drugs or by
flying again. He never got to the bottom of the trouble, namely, a
suicidal tendency our to his deepest weakness which he could not
overcome.
When the little prince goes on, he meets with a number of
astonishing things. His first discovery is that there are hundreds of
roses exactly like his own.
And he was overcome with sadness. His flower had
told him that she was the only one of her kind in all
the universe. And here were five thousand of them,
all alike, in one single garden!
“She would be very much annoyed,” he said to
himself, “if she could see that…She would cough
most dreadfully, and she would pretend that she was
dying, to avoid being laughed at. And I should be
obliged to pretend that I was nursing her back to life
—for if I did not do that, to humble myself also, she
would really allow herself to die..”
Then he went on with his selections: “I thought
that I was rich, with a flower that was unique in all
the world; and all I had was a common rose. A
common rose, and three volcanoes that come up to
my knees—and one of them perhaps extinct
forever…That doesn’t make me a very great
prince…”
And he lay down in the grass and cried.
You probably all know examples among Romantic writers, such as, for
instance, E.T.A. Hoffmann’s “The Golden Pot,” about which Aniela
Jaffé has written a very good paper, or the novel Auerilia by Gerard de
Nerval. They show what a great problem it was, especially for the
90

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

Romantic authors, to accept the paradox that the anima could be a
goddess and at the same time an ordinary person. Actually, Gerard de
Nerval fell in love with a little midinette in Paris. Perhaps his having
some German blood in him was responsible for the fact that when he
fell in love he was carried away by deep and overwhelming romantic
feelings, for the girl seemed to him to be the goddess herself and at
least meant as much to him as Beatrice had for Dante. He was
completely overwhelmed by his feelings of romantic love, and then the
French cynical side, the Gaulois side in him, could not stand it, and
spoke of her as une femme ordinaire de notre siècle —an ordinary woman
of our time! The result was that he ran away from her and then had a
very catastrophic dream, namely, he came into a garden where there
was a statue of a beautiful woman which had fallen from its pedestal
and broken into two parts. The dream says: if you judge her like that,
you break her soul image into two—an upper and a lower part. The
upper part is the romantic goddess and the other part is just an
ordinary woman—any other girl would do—and she is a statue and no
longer alive.
Afterward came the whole catastrophic development of his
schizophrenia, which ended in his hanging himself by his braces. The
catastrophe was that he could not stand the paradox that to him this
woman was divine and everything unique; his reasonable personality
had to say she was just one pretty little midinette among hundreds in
Paris, and he a young man who had fallen in love with her, and there
were hundreds like him too! It is the paradox of being human—that we
are one specimen among three billion other specimens of the same
kind plus the fact that each one of us in unique.
To think of oneself in a statistical way is most destructive to the
process of individuation, because it makes everything relative. Jung
says that Communism is less dangerous than the fact that we are all
more penetrated by our habit of thinking statistically about ourselves.
We believe in scientific statistics which say that in Switzerland so and
so many couples marry per year and find no flat, or that there are so
and so many in each town, etc. You do not realize what it does to you
when you read statistics. It is completely destructive poison, and what
is worse is that it is not true; it is a falsified image of reality. If we begin
to think statistically, we begin to think against our own uniqueness.
But it is not only thinking but a way of feeling. If you go up and down
the street, you see all those stupid faces and then look into a window
and see that you look just as stupid as the other, if not worse! And then
91

Marie-Louise von Franz

it becomes the thought that if an atom bomb destroyed all that, who
would regret it? Thank God, those lives have come to and end,
including my own! That is the statistical mood in which one is
overwhelmed by the manifoldness and ordinariness of life. This is
wrong, because statistics are built up on probability, which is only one
way of explaining reality, and as we know, there is just as much
uniqueness and irregularly.
The fact that this table does not levitate, but remains where it is, is
only because the billions and billions and billions of electrons which
constitute the table tend statistically to behave like that. But each
electron in itself could do something else. Or, suppose put a lion into a
room into which you introduced one person at a time. You would see
that each individual would behave differently. One would stand
petrified and exclaim, “Oh!” Another would dash out of the room, the
third might not be frightened at all or have a delayed reaction and
afterward say he had not believed it. As a test, it would be quite
revealing, for each person would react typically and differently. But if
you brought a lion into this room now, I bet that everyone would retire
to the back of the room, for then the unique reaction prevails. That is
why statistics are only half right. They give a completely false picture
because they only give the average probability. When we walk through
the woods we step on a certain number of ants and snails and kill
them, but if we could write the life history of each ant or snail we
would see that its death was a very meaningful end at a typical
moment of its life.
That was really the basic philosophical problem Thornton Wilder
raised when he wrote The Bridge of San Luis Rey. The bridge collapsed
at a certain moment and five people were drowned—you read of such
things every day in the paper. But Thornton Wilder asked whether that
was just chance. He tried to show that each of those five had a typical
inner development in their lives and that being drowned when the
bridge collapsed was the finale to a very meaningful moment in the
lives of each one. But the statistician would say that it was quite
probable, since every day two hundred people crossed the bridge, so
anytime it fell there would be about five who would be drowned, and
they would be there by chance. That is a falsified view of reality, but
we are all poisoned through and through by it. It is something that has
to be faced. Gerard de Neval, for instance, could not face the problem
that the woman he loved was absolutely unique to him, for his
statistical reasoning told him that she was just one of the many
92

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

thousands—which in a way was true too. But it was a half truth, and a
half truth is worse than an absolute lie. This is what causes so much
difficulty for the puer aeternus and why he does not want to go to an
office and do some ordinary job, or be with a woman, because he is
always inwardly toying with a thousand possibilities of life and cannot
choose just one. It seems to him that that would mean a statisticalaverage situation. Recognition of the fact that one is among thousands
and that there is nothing special about that is an intellectual insight
against which there stands the feeling function.
The inner battle between the feeling of uniqueness and statistical
thinking is generally a battle between intellectualism and allowing
feeling its own place in life, because feeling evaluates what is
important to me, and my own importance is the counterbalance. If you
have real feeling you can say certainly that this is an ordinary woman
(for if you see her walking along the street and she is not very different
from any other), but to me she is of the highest value. That would mean
that the ego makes up its mind to defend and stand up for its own
feeling without destroying the other aspect: “Yes, that may be so from
the statistical point of view, but in my life there are certain values, and
to to me this woman has this value.” For that an act of loyalty is
required towards one’s own feeling. Otherwise one is split off from it
by statistical thinking, which is why intellectual people tend toward
Communism and such ways of thought. They cut themselves off from
the feeling function. The feeling function makes your life and your
relationships and deeds feel unique and gives them a definite value.
When the statistical way of thinking gets people, it means they have
no feeling, or weak feeling, or they tend to betray their own feeling.
You can say that the man who does not stand for his feelings is weak
on the eros side, for he cannot take his own feelings and stand by
them: “That is how I intend to live, for that is the way I feel.”
Admittedly, that is more difficult for a man than for a woman, which is
expressed when we say that a man is weak on the eros side. For
example, if you say to a mother that her children are not unique, that
there are such brats all over the place, she will reply that to her they are
unique, for they are her children. A woman is more likely to have a
personal attitude.
The man has to think impersonally and objectively and, if he is a
modern type, also statistically, and then it turns like a poison against
him. This is especially true for men who have a military career and
have to sign papers which decide the life and death or fate of many
93

Marie-Louise von Franz

people. A high-ranking officer has to decide what battalion to send to a
certain place, knowing that some of those men will probably not come
back, that some have to be sacrificed. He must detach his feeling in
order to be able to act, for if at such a moment he were to think
personally and with feeling about those men in the battalion whom he
is sending to their death he would not be able to do it. The same
applies to a surgeon who, when he has to perform an operation, must
not reflect and remember that this is such and such a person. He has to
perform a technical operation which will result in life or death, and
this is why most surgeons do not operate on members of their own
family. Experience has proved that it is much better not to do so. I
know of many accidents which have happened (just an awkwardness
on the part of a surgeon who never makes a mistake, but if it is his own
wife or daughter he may), so it is better that the operation should be
perfectly performed by the colleague in whom he has the most
confidence.
To be able to detach from feeling is an essential part of a man’s life,
for he has to have a cold, scientific, objective standpoint. But if he does
not relate to the anima and try to deal with his eros problems, then he
cuts his soul into two. That is why men, in general, have more trouble
in Jungian psychology than women. Because of our insistence on the
acceptance of the unconscious, men have to accept feeling and
relatedness—eros—and to a man that is just disgusting; it is as if from
now on he must nurse babies. It feels like that to him—it is against
nature. But if men wish to develop further—just as women must now
learn to share the man’s world by becoming more objective and less
personal—they have to make the counter-gesture of taking their own
feeling and their own eros problems more seriously. It is an
unavoidable part of human development that we have to integrate the
other side—the undeveloped side—and if we do not, then it catches us
against our will. Indeed, the more a man takes his eros problem
seriously, the less effeminate he becomes, although it may look to him
like the opposite. If he stiffens and does not take his feeling problems
seriously, he will involuntarily become effeminate. In general it can be
said that the puer who has a tendency to become effeminate has a
better chance if only he will take his feeling seriously and not fall into
the pitfall of statistical thinking—if he does not suddenly think, “Oh,
Lord!! Hundreds and thousands!—and me too!”
The story continues very logically. The next creature the little prince
meets is a fox, who tells him that he wants the little prince to tame him.
94

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

It was then that the fox appeared.
“Good morning, “ said the fox.
“Good morning,” the little prince responded
politely, although when he turned around he saw
nothing.
“I am right here,” the voice said, “under the apple
tree.”
“Who are you?” Asked the little prince, adding,
“You are very pretty to look at.”
“I am a fox,” the fox said.
“Come and play with me,” proposed the little
prince. “I am so unhappy.”
“I cannot play with you,” the fox said. “I am not
tamed.”
“Ah! Please excuse me,” said the little prince.
But, after some thought, he added: “What does
that mean—‘tame’?”
“You do not live here,” said the fox. “What is that
you are looking for?”
“I am looking for men,” said the little prince.
“What does that mean—‘tame’?”
“Men,” said the fox. “They have guns, and they
hunt. It is very disturbing. They also raise chickens.
These are their only interests. Are you looking for
chickens?”
“No,” said the little prince. “I am looking for
friends.”
So you see Saint-Exupéry knows what projection is!
”What does that mean—‘tame’?”
“It is an act too often neglected,” said the fox. “It
means to establish ties.”
“To establish ties?”
“Just that,” said that fox. “To me, you are still
nothing more than a little boy who is just like a
hundred thousand other little boys.”
Now he is going to say how you get out of statistical thinking.
”And I have no need of you. And you, on your part,
have no need of me. To you, I am nothing more than
a fox like a hundred thousand other foxes. But if you
tame me, then we shall need each other. To me, you
95

Marie-Louise von Franz

will be unique in all the world. To you, I shall be
unique in all the world…”
“I am beginning to understand,” said the little
prince. “There is a flower…I think she has tamed
me…”
“It is possible,” said the fox. “On the Earth one sees
all sorts of things.”
“Oh, but this is not on the Earth!” Said the little
prince.
The fox seemed perplexed, and very curious.
“On another planet?”
“Yes.”
“Are there hunters on that planet?”
“No.”
“Ah, that is interesting! Are there chickens?”
“No.”
“Nothing is perfect,” sighed the fox.
But he came back to his idea.
“My life is very monotonous,” he said. “I hunt
chickens; men hunt me. All the chickens are just alike,
and all men are just alike. And, in consequence, I am
a little bored. But if you tame me, it will be as if the
sun came to shine on my life. I shall know the sound
of a step that will be different from all the others.
Other steps send me hurrying back underneath the
ground. Yours will call me, like music, out of my
burrow. And then look: you seen the grain-fields
down yonder? I do not eat bread. Wheat is of no use
to me. The wheat fields have nothing to say to me.
And that is sad. But you have hair that is the color of
gold. Think how wonderful that will be when you
have tamed me! The grain which is also golden, will
bring me back the thought of you. And I shall love to
listen to the wind in the wheat…”
A little later he says:
”What must I do, to tame you?”
“You must be very patient,” replied the fox. “First
you will sit down at a little distance from me—like
that—in the grass. I shall look at you out of the corner
of my eye, and you will say nothing. Words are the
96

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

source of misunderstandings. But you will sit a little
closer to me, every day..”
So they become closer friends and when the hour for the little prince’s
departure comes, the fox tells his secret, as he had promised he would.
”And now here is my secret, a very simple secret: It is
only with the heart that one can see rightly; what is
essential is invisible to the eye.”
“What is essential is invisible to the eye,” the little
prince repeated, so that he would be sure to
remember.
“It is time you have wasted for your rose that
makes your rose so important.”
“It is the time I have wasted for my rose —“ said
that the little prince, so that he would be sure to
remember.
“Men have forgotten this truth,” said the fox. “But
you must not forget it. You become responsible,
forever, for what you have tamed. You are
responsible for your rose…”
“I am responsible for my rose,” the little prince
repeated, so that he would be sure to remember.
It can be said that the fox teaches the little prince the important value
of the here-and-now and, with it, of feeling. Feeling gives value to the
present, for without it one has no relationship to the here-and-now
situation, and with it comes responsibility and, through that, a formed
individual. Here again we have the frequent motif of the helpful
animal which teaches man how to become human or, in other words,
teaches the process of individuation.
In his article “The Primordial Child in Primordial Times,” Professor
Kerényi gives a Tatar poem which runs:
Once upon a time, long ago,
There lived an orphan boy,
Created of God,
Created of Pajana.
Without food to eat,
Without clothes to wear:
So he lived.
No woman to marry him.
A fox came.
The fox said to the youth:
97

Marie-Louise von Franz

“How will you get to be a man?” he said.
And the boy said:
“I don’t know myself how I shall get to be a man”11
And then, exactly like the fox in our story, this fox teaches the orphan
boy how to become human. So you can say that like the snake the fox
represents an instinctual power in man himself which though it is
represented as an animal, really belongs to humanity. In mythology
and also in medieval allegories, the fox plays a very paradoxical role.
For instance, Picinellus says that in his Mundus Symbolicus: “The fox
represents sly cruelty; he is a bad flatterer. He represents lust. He is
extremely cautious and moves along in crooked paths.” Gregory the
Great says, “Foxes are false animals, they always use crooked ways
and therefore represent cunning sly demons.” This fits the fact that in
Southern Germany, Austria and Switzerland, foxes are supposed to be
the souls of witches. In our local stories it is believed that when a witch
goes out, her body lies in bed half dead and her soul goes out as a fox
and causes damage. There are a lot of stories where a hunter meets a
fox who causes a storm, so that the hay which has just been brought in
gets blown away—or something of that kind. Or, there is a fox near an
avalanche and the avalanche comes down, and then the hunter shoots
but only wounds the fox, and the next morning when he goes through
the village he sees an old woman limping, or with a bandaged arm,
and he says: “Aha! That was the fox!”
Strangely enough, in China and Japan there is the same belief that a
fox is the exteriorized soul of the witch or the hysterical woman, or is
also the cause of hysteria or psychological trouble in women. A
German psychiatrist called Baelz was in Tokyo about 1910 and he saw
such a fox case and described it, without knowing any of the
mythology which I have been telling you. What happened was that a
Japanese peasant woman who had fits was brought in. When she was
normal, she was absolutely stupid—a fat, unintelligent, very dumb
woman. Then she got what could be called “fox fits” and became quite
different. She herself said that she felt a pain in her chest and then she
had a nervous need to bark and would bark like a fox. Afterward, as
Baelz says, she went into a trancelike state and became clairvoyant. She
told the psychiatrists in the ward all about their private lives and their
marriage problems and everything else. She was just a medium. She

11

Jung and Kerényi, Essays on a Science of Mythology, p. 29.
98

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

was highly witty and intelligent at such times and very cunning. After
a while she would get tired and pale and would bark a little again, and
then fall asleep. When she woke up she would again be the stupid
woman with whom you could not do much. It was a typical case of a
dual personality: she was either the fox-witch or a stupid peasant. In
conjunction with the belief in this country that foxes are witch-souls, it
is a very interesting story.
In medieval symbolism, the fox has not only this negative meaning
but is also an animal of the god Dionysus, who has, among others, the
name Bassareus, which is connected with the word “fox”. In Christian
allegory this idea continued. As Picinellus says, “The fox is a symbol of
faith and foresight because a fox investigates things by his hearing,
and thus also the Christian can perceive the divine mysteries only with
his ears and not penetrate them with his eyes.” Here the fox is the one
who knows about the invisible. This is interesting because in our story
(Quite independently, for I do not think Saint-Exupéry read anything
as strange as Picinellus) the fox also says. “Only the things seen by the
heart which are invisible outwardly are the real things.” The fox
believes in that which is not obvious but is known to feeling—that
which is opposed to statistical reality.
If the little prince had understood what the fox said, if he had really
understood it and had not just repeated it mechanically without
apparently taking it in, what would have happened to him? He does
suddenly understand why the rose back on his planet is meaningful,
for he says “Oh, I have wasted a lot of time. So that is why she is
unique to me! And that is why I have to be responsible for her and not
take her as one of the many.” That realization looks as though he had
understood the fox, but what is lacking?
Answer: He wants to go back to the planet.
That helps him get back to the rose later, perhaps to choose death.
But what he does not notice is that he has one friend on the planet, the
rose, and one friend down here, the fox! If he had really understood, he
would not only have made up his mind to go back to the rose, but he
should have fallen into a conflict and asked himself what he was going
to do? The fox is here on earth and that friendship must last, for
otherwise it is meaningless, but now the fox makes him realize that at
the same time he has an obligation to the rose. There again is a fatal
constellation! He should not have concluded that he has to go back to
his rose; he should have fallen into a conflict because now he has a
friend on each of the planets. But it does not even occur to him that
99

Marie-Louise von Franz

through the fox he has got into a conflict. His only conclusion is that he
has to go back to his rose.
So the fox’s teaching, which really would be something to tie him to
the earth, operates just the opposite way in him: it liberates him from
the earth and makes him long to go back to the asteroid. That shows
how deep and fatal the death pull is in Saint-Exupéry. It would have
meant a conflict if he had realized that he had to say yes to the fox
here, and also yes to the rose over there. And what about that? Then he
would have fallen into an adult psychological stage where one is
constantly in the conflict, with obligations to the figures of the Beyond,
that is, to the unconscious, and obligations to human reality on this
side.
For instance, if a man has an obligation to his anima and also to the
woman with whom he made friends or married, then he gets into a
typical duality situation of life where one always has a real conflict and
a double pull, and is always torn between obligations to this side of life
and to the inner or other side. That would be the realization, of the
crucifixion, the basic truth of life, that life is double and is a double
obligation. Life itself is a conflict because it always means the collision
of two tendencies. That is what makes up life, but that realization
escapes the little prince completely or he escapes the realization. It is
only more of those little, but fatal, turn in the story which point toward
the tragic end.

100

Lecture 5

Last time we ended with the problem of the fox, namely, that when the
fox taught the little prince that the feeling function establishes ties and
changes statistical thinking (for feeling thereby makes one’s own
situation and one’s own relationships unique and breaks the spell of
statistical thinking, which works against one), then the little prince at
once made up his mind to go back to the rose without it ever occurring
to him that he has now also some tie to the fox. Later he says to SaintExupéry:
”You must return to your engine. I will be waiting for
you here. Come back tomorrow evening…”
But I was not reassured. I remembered the fox.
“One runs the risk of weeping a little, if one lets
himself be tamed…”
You see, he only feels some slight sorrow at leaving the fox. It does not
occur to him, as I pointed out last time that he could get into a conflict
and take that conflict seriously, asking himself to whom he was now
bound. The decision is in favor of a return to the rose and the Beyond.
Then follows one of the most poetic episodes of the book. SaintExupéry begins to suffer from thirst and runs away into the desert. The
little prince goes with him and suddenly causes him to find an
imaginary well whose water refreshes him and fills him with joy—it is
a fata morgana. They walk and walk, and the little prince always says
that there is a well somewhere. And then they see one. Saint-Exupéry
begins to doubt if this can be true, knowing that where there is a well
in the desert there is also a village, but with this well there is no
village, so he is very doubtful. But the little prince runs towards it and
tries to work the pulley and the two drink from this imaginary well. In
101

Marie-Louise von Franz

Terre des Hommes, one of his other novels, Saint-Exupéry says of the
water:
Oh water, thou hast no color and no taste. Thou canst
be defined. One tasteth thee without knowing thee.
Thou dost penetrate us with a joy which cannot be
explained by the senses. Thought thy blessing all the
dried-up sources of our heart begin to flow afresh.
Thou art the greatest treasure on earth. Thou dost not
suffer any mixture or brook alteration. Thou art a
dark divinity but thou dost impart an infinitely
simple joy.
This episode in the book goes back to the time when he was lost with
his mechanic, Prevost. They walked and walked and had the
experience of a fata morgana, and then finally, as I told you before, at
the last minute they met a Bedouin who gave them a drink of water
from his bottle and so rescued them. At that moment he probably had
the experience which he described in Terre des Hommes, and here he has
it again. It was one of his deepest experiences and therefore repeats
itself in his books.
Since the divine child, whom the little prince represents, is a symbol
of the Self, he is also the source of life. Like many mythological saviors,
or child-gods, he has the source. How can you explain that? Why is the
motif of the source of life, the water of life, so often combined with the
motif of the divine child? What are the practical links?
Answer: He has the force of renewal and is the symbol of the Self.
Yes, but how does that work out in life, practically? Why does the
child side represent the flow of life and the possibility of renewal?
Answer: Because the child has a naive view.
Yes, because the child has a naive view of life, and if you remember
your own childhood, it is when you are intensely alive. The child, if it
is not already neurotic, is constantly interested in something. Whatever
else the child may suffer from, it does not suffer from the remoteness of
life, normally—only if it is thoroughly poisoned by the neuroses of its
parents. Otherwise it is fully alive, and that is why people, thinking
back to their own childhood, long to achieve that naive vitality that
they have lost in becoming grown-up. The child is an inner possibility,
the possibility of renewal, but how does that get into the actual life of
an adult? What does it mean, for instance, if the adult person dreams
about a girl or a boy? What does that mean practically?
Answer: A new venture, or a new relationship.
102

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

A new relationship perhaps. I would say a new adventure on the
level of those functions that have remained naive. It has to do with the
inferior function, through which the renewal comes, which has
remained childlike and completely naive. It therefore conveys a new
view and experience of life when the worn-out superior function
comes to its end. It imparts all those naive pleasures which one has lost
in childhood. That is why we have to learn to play again, but on the
line of the fourth or inferior function. It does not help if, for instance, if
an intellectual person starts some kind of intellectual play. If a thinking
type were to quote the Bible, saying that unless you become like little
children you will never enter the kingdom of heaven, and then would
go to a club and play chess, that would not help at all, for it would
again involve the main function. There is a great temptation to do that,
namely, to accept the idea of play and of turning to something else,
something noncommittal, but to do it within the field of the main
function. I have often seen feeling types whose feeling function has run
out, but if I tell them they must do something which as no purpose,
something playful, then they propose going and working in a
kindergarten, or something like that. But that is nonsense, for that
would again be on the feeling side, that would be a half-way
acceptance and an escape at the same time.
The really difficult thing is to turn directly to the inferior function
and play there. For this the ego has to give up control. If you touch on
the inferior function it decides on the kind of play, you cannot decide
on it. The inferior function, just like an obstinate child, will insist that it
wants to play at something or other, though you may say that it is not
suitable and would not work well. For example, in an intuitive, the
inferior function may want to play with clay and the person lives in a
hotel room and would much prefer something clean because that
makes a lot of dirt in a hotel room! But you cannot dictate the inferior
function! If you are an intuitive and your inferior function wants to
play with stones or clay, then you have to make the effort to find a
place where that would be possible. That is exactly the difficulty; the
ego always has thousands of objections to turning to the inferior side.
It is always something very difficult to arrange practically.
The inferior function is a real nuisance, just as children are, for you
cannot put it in a box and take it out when it suits you. It is a living
entity with its own demands, and it is a nuisance to the ego which
wants to have its own way. The half concession of giving the enemy
something so as to be left alone, which most people try when they see
103

Marie-Louise von Franz

they have to turn to the inferior function, always reminds me of the
Greeks who went about with their pocket full of honey-cakes.
Whenever they saw an abyss, or a chasm, or something like that, they
quickly threw in a honey-cake, for if one threw something to the dark
powers they would leave you alone, a kind of buying oneself off by
throwing a sacrifice. Or, for instance, in the descent to the underworld,
the Greek heroes always had honey-cakes to throw to Cerberus so that
he fell asleep and they could slip by. That can work sometimes but for
the main conflict it does not work. You cannot appease these demands
by throwing them something. But if you accept the humiliating
experience which makes the ego submit to the demands of the inferior
or childish part of the personality, then the divine child becomes a
source of life. Then life has a new face and one discovers new
experiences. Everything changes. Also, naturally, the child is a uniting
symbol and brings together the separated or disassociated parts of the
personality, which again has to do with the quality of being naive. If I
trust my naive reaction, then I am whole; I am wholly in the situation
and wholly in life. But most people do not dare do this because one
exposes oneself too much. However, one just needs the courage, being
somewhat shrewd at the same time, so that one does not expose
oneself to those people who do not understand. One should be clever
and not just childish.
When you begin to play with the inferior function you touch
uniqueness, which is at the bottom of all the tests! In the tree test, or
the Rorschach tests, you tell people to do whatever comes into their
minds, and they give themselves away at once, because play is genuine
and therefore also unique. That is why child therapists let children
play, and in two minutes they reveal their whole problem, for in that
way they are themselves. I often suggest to the feeling types that they
should take some striking motif in a dream, a numinous motif, and try
to do some real thinking on that, not to look up the indexes in Jung’s
books, but really try to find out what they think about the symbols
themselves. And then very often they get suddenly quite passionate
and have the most amazing thoughts—sometimes to what a thinking
type may seem to be very naive thoughts.
I often notice that when feeling types begin to think, they do so
exactly as did the early Greek philosophers, the pre-Socratics. They
have thoughts like those of Heraclitus or Democritus and such people,
and are as fired by these ideas as were the early Greeks. If you read
Empedocles or Heraclitus, there is an eternal youth in the way they
104

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

think, and that is why I love them so much. To us nowadays it seems
like mythological thinking and not very scientific. For instance, the
atomic theories of Democritus are awfully naive if looked at according
to modern theories, but there is a kind of wholeness or enthusiasm
about them, together with the idea now they see the whole picture.
Naturally, the material is full of projections of the symbol of Self, so
one gets quite carried away when reading it. There is a kind of
springtime of the spirit; early Greek philosophy is like the blossoming
of spring philosophy. Very often if a feeling type gets down to his own
thinking, he comes to this kind of experience. When that happens the
thinking type must retire to his own estate and not say that one knew
that twenty thousand years ago! The same thing applies to the
thinking type if you once get such a type to bring up a naive real
feeling and not something organized. Usually the thinking type is so
much a thinker that he even organizes his own feelings appropriately,
and because he does not get on with his real feelings, because they are
unadapted, he generally has a pseudo-adaptation to feeling.
I would say that the main thing in getting to the playfulness of the
inferior function is to scratch away the pseudo-adaptation with which
we all cover the inferior function. The feeling type, for instance, is
usually full of school and university theories and imagines that those
are his thoughts. But they are not; they are pseudo-thinking
adaptations to cover up for the real fact that his thinking is awfully
embryonic and naive. The same holds good for the thinking type who
have very naive feelings; for instance, “I love you, I hate you.” If he
went round the world saying that to everyone, or saying “I can’t stand
you,” you can imagine what a stumbling-block he would be! It would
not work for two minutes! Even in school you cannot tell your teacher
that you cannot stand him! I am a thinking type myself and I loved
certain teacher and hated others. I could never dissimulate my feelings
sufficiently and always showed what I felt, though I knew it would
have been much more diplomatic not to show too clearly how much I
despised a certain teacher. But it was always quite obvious.
When you become adult you hide these reactions and then acquire
pseudo-feeling adaptation. The thinking types are often quite amiable
and seem to have balanced feeling reactions, but never trust that! That
is just a pseudo-adaptation because the other is so painful and helpless
and childish that one cannot show it. But if you do have to go to it then
you must again dig up the naiveté of your thinking or your feeling and
get the crust off the pseudo-adaptation.
105

Marie-Louise von Franz

Intuitives very often have no relationship to the body and are likely
to dress badly or be dirty. Since that does not work they learn to wash
and put on nice clothes, and so on, but although they might be quite
correctly dressed, there is no personal style. If they would dig up their
real sensation, their taste would be artistic, but weird and very much
out of the ordinary. Intuitives who get down to their sensation cannot
buy ready-made clothes; everything has to be made for them. Neither
can they eat hotel food; they either have to have a cook or cook for
themselves, and it has to be very special. It gives them a lot of trouble
to discover this, and, what is worse, it is a nuisance and expensive both
in money and time. You can have the tailor and the cook, but that is not
quite genuine, or you can go down to the inferior function, but that is
the greatest time-thief in existence because it is primitively slow.
You know that in primitive countries it is impossible to hurry
people. If you travel in Egypt it is no good ordering the cars for 9 a.m.
and expecting to be beyond the Nile at 10, or in the Kings’ Tombs.
Everyone who travels in the Orient knows that one has to put up with
being two or three hours late and not arrive on time as Europeans do.
But once you have made the adaptation, life is much nicer because you
have all kinds of experiences: one’s car breaks down and causes a lot of
fun, instead of arriving at the Kings’ Tombs you get into the desert and
have a lot of swearing, and so forth, but that’s life too! You can’t
organize the inferior function. It is awfully expensive and needs a lot of
time, and that is one reason why it is such a cross in our lives, because
it makes us so inefficient if we try to act through it. It has to be given
whole Sundays and afternoons and nothing may come out—except
that the inferior function comes to life. But that is the whole point. A
feeling type will only bring up his thinking if he begins to think about
something he can’t use in this world, neither for examinations nor
study, but if he thinks about something that interests him it itself, that
is how to get going because it is not possible to yoke inferior
playfulness to utilitarian motives.
The essence of play is that it has no meaning and is not useful. I
would tell a feeling type to learn by heart what he needs for exams,
and try not to think, because he won’t be able to do so. He should
make pseudo-adaptations, and if a thinking type gets into a situation
where he has to behave—say he has to attend a funeral—then he must
on no account pull out his personal feelings. He must just behave and
do the conventional thing with flowers and condolences; that is the
right pseudo-adaptation. To get at his real feelings, the thinking type
106

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

must find a situation where he can play, and then it will be quite
different. So the first thing to do is to take it out of the adaptation field
and keep the pseudo-adaptation for those cases where it is necessary. I
think nobody can really develop the inferior function before having
first creating a temenos, namely, a sacred grove, a hidden place where
he can play. The first thing is to find a Robinson Crusoe playground,
and then when you have gotten rid of all onlookers you can begin! As
a child, one needed a place and a time and no interfering adult
audience.
To return to our book—after this climax of happiness where they
have found a well—the tragic end follows relatively quickly. The little
prince asks Saint-Exupéry to draw him a muzzle for the sheep in order
that it may not eat the rose on his asteroid, and by that Saint-Exupéry
guesses that the little prince intends to leave the earth again. SaintExupéry continues working on the repair of his engine and has
accomplished it just on the evening where he hears the little prince
arranging a nocturnal rendezvous with somebody. He rushes down to
see whom the little prince is talking to.
Beside the well there was a ruin of an old stone wall.
When I came back from my work, the next evening, I
saw from some distance away my little prince sitting
on top of his wall, with his feet dangling. And I heard
him say:
“Then you don’t remember. This is not the exact
spot.”
Another voice must have answered him, for he
replied to it:
“Yes, yes! It is the right day, but this is not the
place.”
I continued my walk toward the wall. At no time
did I see or hear anyone. The little prince, however,
replied once again:
“—Exactly. You will see where my track begins, in
the sand. You have nothing to do but wait for me
there. I shall be there tonight.”
I was only twenty meters from the wall, and I still
saw nothing.
After a silence the little prince spoke again:
“You have good poison? You are sure that it will
not make me suffer long?”
107

Marie-Louise von Franz

I stopped in my tracks, my heart tore asunder; but
still I did not understand.
“Now go away,” said the little prince. “I want to
get down from the wall.”
I dropped my eyes, then, to the foot of the wall—
and I leaped into the air. There before me, facing the
little prince, was one of those yellow snakes that take
thirty seconds to bring your life to an end. Even as I
was digging into my pocket to get out my revolver I
made a running step back. But, at the noise I made,
the snake let himself flow easily across the sand like
the dying spray of a fountain, and, in no apparent
hurry, disappeared, with a light metallic sound,
among the stones.
I reached the wall just in time to catch my little
man in my arms; his face was white as snow.
“What does this mean?” I demanded. “Why are
you talking with snakes?”
I had loosened the golden muffler that he always
wore. I had moistened his temples, and had given
him some water to drink. And now I did not dare ask
him any more questions. He looked at me very
gravely, and put his arms round my neck. I felt his
heart beating like that of a dying bird, shot with
someone’s rifle…
“I am glad that you found what was the matter
with your engine,” he said. “Now you can go back
home—“
“How do you know about that?”
I was just coming to tell him that my work had
been successful, beyond anything that I had dared to
hope.
He made no answer to my question, but added:
“I, too, am going back home today…”
Then sadly—
“It is much farther…It is much more difficult…”
I realized clearly that something extraordinary was
happening. I was holding him close in my arms as if
he were a little child; and yet it seemed to me that he
was rushing headlong toward an abyss from which I
108

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

could do nothing to restrain him…
His look was very serious, like someone lost far
away.
“I have your sheep. And I have the sheep’s box.
And I have the muzzle…”
And he gave me a sad smile
I waited a long time. I could see that he was
reviving little by little.
“Dead little man,” I said to him. “You are afraid…”
He was afraid, there was no doubt about that. But
he laughed lightly.
“I shall be much more afraid this evening…”
Once again I felt myself frozen by the sense of
something irreparable.
The little prince trembles when Saint-Exupéry rushes towards him and
takes him in his arms and scolds him. But Saint-Exupéry feels that he
cannot hold him back, that it is too late and nothing will help him. The
experience of helplessness, of not being able to save someone from
death, has been impressed on him through the death of his little
brother. I have now been able to look up the age at which this brother
died. I had thought it was when he was six or seven, but it was much
later, for François died when he was fifteen. Saint-Exupéry was
seventeen at the time, so there is no doubt that he experienced the
death of his brother consciously and that the experience shocked him
deeply. In his novels if he describes somebody’s death, he always
describes this terrific feeling of helplessness. One stands there with the
feeling that the person is slowly slipping away, floating away from
you, and that you are utterly helpless and cannot do anything. You
cannot hold them back, and here is the same experience, for he realizes
that the little prince has arranged a meeting with the snake in order to
be killed by the sand-viper, but he feels that he cannot do anything.
The little prince tries to comfort him instead of being comforted and
helped by Saint-Exupéry. He says:
”All men have the stars…but they are not the same
things for different people. For some, who are
travellers, the stars are guides. For others they are no
more than little lights in the sky. For others, who are
scholars, they are problems. For my businessman
they were wealth. But all these stars are silent. You—
you alone—will have the stars as no one else has
109

Marie-Louise von Franz

them—“
“What are you trying to say?”
“In one of the stars I shall be living. In one of them
I shall be laughing. And so it will be as if all the stars
were laughing, when you look at the sky at night…
You—only you—will have stars that can laugh!”
And he laughed again.
“And when your sorrow is comforted (time
soothes all sorrows) you will be content that you have
known me. You will always be my friend. You will
want to laugh with me. And you will sometimes open
your window, so, for that pleasure…And your
friends will be properly astonished to see you
laughing as you look up at the sky! Then you will say
to them, ‘Yes, the stars always make me laugh!’ And
they will think you are crazy. It will be a very shabby
trick that I shall have played on you…”
And he laughed again.
“It will be as if, in place of the stars, I have given
you a great number of little bells that knew how to
laugh…”
And then he laughed again. Then he quickly
became serious:
“Tonight—you know…Do not come.”
“I shall not leave you,” I said.
“I shall look as if I were suffering. I shall look a
little as if I were dying. It is like that. Do not come to
see that. It is not worth the trouble…”
“I shall not leave you”
But he was worried.
“I tell you—it is also because of that snake. He
must not bite you. Snakes—they are malicious
creatures. This one might bite you just for fun…”
But a thought came to reassure him
“It is true that they have no more poison for a
second bite.”
Though Saint-Exupéry promises not to leave the little prince, he misses
going with him. The text runs:
That night I did not see him set out on his way. He
got away from me without making a sound. When I
110

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

succeeded in catching up with him he was walking
along with a quick and resolute step. He said to me
merely:
“Ah! You are there…”
And he took me by the hand. But he was still
worrying.
“It was wrong of you to come. You will suffer. I
shall look as if I were dead; and that will not be
true…”
I said nothing.
“You understand…It is too far. I cannot carry this
body with me. It is too heavy.”
I said nothing.
“But it will be like an old abandoned shell. There is
nothing sad about old shells…”
I said nothing.
He was a little discouraged. But he made one more
effort:
“You know, it will be very nice. I, too, shall look at
the stars. All the stars will be wells with a rusty
pulley. All the stars will pour out fresh water for me
to drink…”
I said nothing.
“That will be so amusing! You will have five
hundred million little bells, and I shall have five
hundred million springs of fresh water…”
And he too said nothing more, because he was
crying…
“Here it is. Let me go by myself.”
And he sat down, because he was afraid. Then he
said again:
“You know—my flower…I am responsible for her.
And she is so weak! She is so naive! She has four
thorns, of no use at all, to protect herself against all
the world…”
I too sat down, because I was not able to stand up
any longer.
“There now—that is all…”
He still hesitated a little; then he got up. He took
one step. I could no move.
111

Marie-Louise von Franz

Saint-Exupéry sat down, and then suddenly the little prince got back
up and took one step—and now comes the decisive sentence: ”I could
not move.” Saint-Exupéry cannot do a thing. He remains sitting.
There was nothing there but a flash of yellow close to
his ankle. He remained motionless for an instant. He
did not cry out. He fell as gently as a tree falls. There
was not even any sound, because of the sand.
After a while Saint-Exupéry remembers with horror that he had
forgotten to draw the strap for the sheep’s muzzle, so that the little
prince will never be able to fasten it on, and from now on every time
he looks up at the stars he is tormented as to whether the sheep has
eaten the rose or not. Then follows the last picture. He says:
This is, to me, the loveliest and saddest landscape in
the world….It is here that the little prince appeared
on Earth, and disappeared.
Look at it carefully so that you will be able to
recognize it in case you travel some day to the
African desert. And, if you should come upon this
spot, please do not hurry on. Wait for a time, exactly
under the star. Then, if a little man appears who
laughs, who has golden hair and refuses to answer
questions, you will know who he is. If this should
happen, please comfort me. Send me word that he
has come back.

112

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

We have to discuss this part at some length because it is full of
symbolism. First it must be said that the little prince has to be killed
like a mortal human being in order to return to his star. He says that
his body would be too heavy for that. This is a very strange motif
because if you think of the little prince as an inner figure, a
psychological inner figure, a symbol of self within Saint-Exupéry, then
he certainly would not need to be deprived of his body. He would
already be in the psychological realm and could return whenever he
wanted—could come to earth and go back to the star again. He came
down holding onto a flock of birds, and at that time he already had a
certain amount of body. He could not fly through the air or fall down
through it to the earth, but needed the help of the birds. It is strange
that this idea does not occur to him again, but the only point I want to
stress is that he consists of psyche and body. What does that show?
Answer: He has got into the human realm.
Yes, he has incarnated to a certain extent. He is not a content of the
unconscious which has remained in the Beyond, in the unconscious. It
has already incarnated in the human realm; it has become physically
real, so to speak, and shows in a nutshell that this symbol is a mixture
of a childish shadow and an aspect of the Self. That is the impurity of
the symbol. The little prince is an impure symbol; that is, it is partly the
childish shadow, which is already incarnated, and it is a symbol of the
113

Marie-Louise von Franz

Self, which is not incarnated. As a symbol of the Self it is in the Beyond
and is eternal, and there is no such thing as death; there is only an
appearing and a disappearing into and out of this realm—just as an
experience of the Self comes to us, and then we lose it again. If we look
at it from the self, it means that it sometimes touches the realm of our
human consciousness and then disappears. But in so far as it has a
body, it has incarnated in us, in our realm. This means that is has
become visible and audible through our own actions; it has become a
part of ourselves, and then the problem is difficult. The snake kills the
shadow, for the snake can only poison this body and thereby free the
symbol of the Self again from this wrong body it got into. The other
possibility would have been that the incarnation would have gone on,
and then the symbol of the little prince would have evolved, on a more
adult and different level, but in this in-between situation the
development is suddenly interrupted by the poison of the snake.
Saint-Exupéry describes the coincidence very artistically. At the very
moment when he can repair his engine and return to the human world
and his fellow beings, just then the little prince makes up his mind to
leave. Saint-Exupéry departs toward a human world and the other
departs to the Beyond. Because from the very beginning this story is
such a mixture of right and wrong symbolism, one does not know at
this moment if this departure of the two is really a positive
development. You could say that now, after this experience of the Self
and the Beyond, Saint-Exupéry can return to his normal adaptation in
this world, and the symbol of the Self, which was only meant to meet
him at this crucial moment, can return to the place it came from. That
would be a positive aspect of this tragic moment, but at the same time
somehow one feels that this is negative, in so far as Saint-Exupéry, in
his own life, did not return to his adaptation to this world but soon
after followed the little prince to the Beyond. So we can say that the
departure had not really happened or was not quite carried through;
they were not cut apart. The human part, namely Saint-Exupéry,
followed the other, and thus the departure of the little prince becomes
an anticipation of Saint-Exupéry’s death. With this goes the fact that
Saint-Exupéry had not accepted the departure, as you see from the last
few words:
Then, if a little man appears who laughs, who has
golden hair and who refuses to answer questions,
you will know who he is. If this should happen,
please comfort me. Send me word that he has come
114

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

back.
Saint-Exupéry had not given up. He cannot accept the departure as
such, though it is quite unlikely that the little prince will ever return.
He has not sacrificed the relationship. That is another fatal hint
because if one does not sacrifice such an experience after having had it,
then there remains a constant pull toward death and unconsciousness
in the hope of finding it again.
That is a very dangerous and typical experience. It belongs to the
neurosis of the puer aeternus who generally, because he is so close to the
unconscious, has overwhelming experiences of it which convey to him
a positive feeling of life. But then he cannot let them go. He just sits
there, waiting and hoping for the experience to come back, and the
more one sits and waits the less it can approach consciousness again
because it is the essence of these experiences that they always come in
a new form. The experience of the Self does not repeat itself, but
generally turns up again at those desperate moments when one does
not look for it any more. It has turned completely in another direction
and suddenly again stands before you in a different form. Because it is
life and the renewal of life itself and the flow of life, it cannot repeat
itself. That would be a contradiction of its very essence. Therefore, if
ever one has an experience of the Self, the only way afterward not to
get poisoned and on the wrong track is to leave it alone, turn away—
turn to the next duty and even try to forget about it. The more the ego
clings to it and wants it back, the more one chases it away with one’s
own ego desire. It is the same, for instance, with positive love or
feeling experiences. People who make childish demands on other
people every time they have a positive love experience, or feeling
experience, with another human being, always want to perpetuate it,
to force it to happen in the same way again. They say, “Let’s take the
same boat trip because of the magical Sunday when it was so
beautiful.” You can be quite sure that it will be the most awful failure.
You may try it, just to show that it does not work. It never works. It
always shows the the ego has not been able to take the experience of
the Self in an adult way, but that something like childish greed has
woken up. The positive experience has called up this childish attitude
—that this is the treasure that should be kept! If you have that reaction,
you chase it away forever and it will never come back. The more you
long for and the more you seek, the more you get into a cramped state
of conscious desire, the more hopeless it is.
The same thing applies to an artist’s work when, through an
115

Marie-Louise von Franz

inspiration from the unconscious, he produces something really
outstandingly beautiful, and then wants to go on in the same style. It
has been a success and the work has been admired, and he just feels
that now he has got it and that something of value has been produced.
He wants to repeat it, to repaint or rewrite in the same manner, but it’s
gone! The second, third and fourth draft are just nothing—the divine
essence has disappeared—the spirit is out of the bottle and he can’t put
it back in again. It often happens that young people produce
something that is a big hit and then become sterile for a long time, for
they cannot go back; ego greed has got into it, and that is the downfall
of the Wunderkinder, the outstandingly gifted children who are sterile
afterward because they cannot get out of this difficulty. The only way
is to turn away and not look back for one minute. But Saint-Exupéry
looks back here: “Tell me, send me word that he has come back,” as
though he were constantly hoping to recapture the experience. That is
fatal.
The snake bites the little prince on the heel, which is obviously
where a snake would bite. This is also a mythological motif. You know
of the Achilles heel, the only place where Achilles could be wounded,
and many other savior gods were often wounded in the feet. For
instance, Philoctetes, written about by Kerényi is his paper “Heres
Iatros,” which means the healing hero. There he has collected all the
Greek material on the healing gods and demons: Asclepius, Chiron,
and so on, all of whom are, according to certain versions, wounded
and therefore healing. One has to be wounded in order to become a
healer. This is the local image of a universal mythological motif, which
is described in Eliade’s book about the initiation of medicine man and
shamans. Nobody becomes either one or the other without first having
been wounded, either cut open by the initiator and having certain
magical stones inserted into his body, or a spear thrown at his neck, or
some such thing. Generally the experiences are ecstatic—stars,
ghostlike demons, hit them or cut them open—but always they have to
be pierced or cut apart before they become healers, for that is how they
acquire the capacity for healing others. How would you interpret that
psychologically?
Answer: He would know the whole process of suffering and of being
wounded and healed.
Yes, but many people have the experience of suffering and do not
become healers. Everyone could become a healer if it depended only
on the experience of suffering, for we have all suffered. At this rate
116

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

everybody would be a shaman.
Answer: By overcoming suffering and having been wounded.
Yes, the natives in their circumpolar regions, for instance, say that
the difference between an ordinary person who suffers and the healer
is that the healer finds a way to overcome and get out of his trouble
without technical help. He can overcome his own suffering; he finds
the creative way out, and that means he finds his own cure, which is
unique. Eliade tells of a very successful reindeer hunter, a provider of
food and therefore a big man in his tribe, who has no thought of
becoming a shaman. However, he gets a nervous disease which keeps
him from going hunting, and then he discovers that as soon as he
learns to drum like a shaman, his disease disappears. As soon as he
begins to “shamanize” by drumming, calling ghosts and making cures,
he is all right. But once he is cured, he has had enough of being a
shaman and goes back to hunting. Then the illness gets him again. So,
in the end, he sulkily puts up with it and becomes a healer since it is
the only way he can keep himself fit. Against his wish and his will,
reindeer hunting is finished forever. This is a striking illustration of a
man’s having to find his own cure after having been wounded by a
neurotic disease and forced into healing activity. Naturally, at first,
when he was confined by his illness, he got a shaman to try to cure
him. But no shaman could. He had to cure himself; he had to
shamanize, and then he was cured. The healing hero, therefore, is the
one who finds some creative way out, a way not already known, and
does not follow a pattern. Ordinary sick people follow patterns, but the
shaman cannot be cured by the usual methods of healing. He has to
find the unique way—the only way that applies to him. The creative
personality who can do that then becomes a healer and is recognized
such by his colleagues.
That, I think, is the most convincing explanation of this motif and
the simplest. But you can also see it differently and that comes into our
story. When the self and the ego get in touch with each other, who is
wounded? As soon as they come together both are wounded because
to get in touch with the ego is a partial damage to the Self, just as it is a
partial damage to the ego to be in touch with the Self. The two cannot
meet without damaging each other. For the Self, you could say that one
way in which it is damaged is that instead of being a potential wholeness
is becomes a partial reality; in part it becomes real within the
individuated person—in the realizing actions and words of the person.
That is a restriction for the Self and its possibilities. The ego, however,
117

Marie-Louise von Franz

is wounded because something greater breaks into its life. We
generally think of that part, which is why Jung says that it means
tremendous suffering to get in touch with the process of individuation.
It causes a great wound because, put simply, we are robbed of the
capacity for arranging our own lives according to our wishes.
If we take the unconscious and the process of individuation
seriously, we can no longer arrange our own lives. For instance, we
think we would like to go somewhere and the dream says No, so we
have to give up the idea. Sometimes it is all right, but sometimes such
decisions are very annoying. To be deprived of an evening out, or a
trip, is not so bad, but there are more serious matters where we greatly
want something which is suddenly vetoed by the unconscious. We feel
broken and crucified, caught in a trap or imprisoned, nailed against the
cross. With your whole heart and mind you want to do something, and
the unconscious vetoes it. In such moments there is naturally an
experience of intense suffering, which is due to the meeting of the Self,
but the Self suffers just as much because it is suddenly caught in the
actuality of an ordinary human life.
That is why, in this connection, Jung refers to the saying of Christ in
the Acts of John, in the Apocrypha: Christ stands in the middle of the
dancing apostles and says, “It is your human suffering that I want to
suffer.” That is the most simple way to put it. If it is not in touch with a
human being, the divine figure has no suffering. It longs to experience
human suffering—not only longs for human suffering but causes it.
Man would not suffer if he were not connected to something greater, or
he would suffer as an animal does: he would just accept fate and die
from it. If you submit to everything that happens like an animal, you
do not suffer intensely but in a kind of dumb way. Animals accept
things as they happen: a leg is lost in an accident, and they hobble
along three legs; they are blinded and try to carry on without eyes and
will probably starve. That is what happens all the time in Nature, but
man feels what happens to him. He has a greater capacity for suffering
because he is more conscious. If his legs are cut off or he is blinded, the
feeling is deeper and more intense because there is more ego and
therefore the ability to rebel against fate. If you have ever had to do
with people who have met a horrible fate, you will have seen what a
terrific revolt can mean. Such people say, “I cannot accept it! I cannot!
Why has this happened to me? It is irreversible, but I cannot accept it!”
The animal does not show such intensity of suffering. It tries to carry
on until it dies; even if its hind legs are paralyzed, it tries to move, and
118

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

usually ends up being eaten—a quick and merciful end. For us it is
worse, because with modern medicine a human being is not killed
quickly. We are preserved in hospitals, and then comes the problem:
what does this mean?—why do I have to go on living? In such cases
the suffering becomes intense and terrible and a real religious problem.
One can say, therefore, that we are more open to real and intense
suffering, and this has to do with the fact that there is something
within us which thinks that this should not be; if it is a part of my life
and inescapable, then I must know what it means. If I know its
meaning I can accept the suffering, but if I do not, then I cannot. I have
seen people who can take what had happened to them with a certain
acceptance and composure when they saw a meaning in it. Although
the suffering continued, they had a kind of quiet island within because
they had the relief of feeling that they knew why they suffered. But to
discover the reason for such suffering we have to follow the way of our
own individuation process because the reason is something unique
and different in each individual (there is no general meaning), and one
has therefore to find that unique meaning. That is why in seeking the
meaning of your suffering you seek for the meaning of your life, which
indicates why the wounded healer is an archetype of the Self—one of
its most widespread features—and is at the bottom of all genuine
healing procedures.
Question: Would you say that suffering, if accepted, could become a
medium of communication with the Self?
That depends on whether it is accepted in the right way, because if it
is accepted with resignation, it does not work. Many people accept
their suffering, but with a tinge of resignation. They put up with it, and
then it does not help. It must be a positive acceptance, and I would say
that you can only get the meaning if you accept. So really it generally
works out as an endless struggle and then a moment of grace, where
suddenly one can accept it and the meaning dawns upon one. One
could not even say which comes first. Sometimes it is the meaning and
then the acceptance, or one makes up one’s mind to accept it and then
at the moment the meaning becomes clear. But it is strangely
interwoven.
Remark: Christians have an idea that suffering is of value, but as a rule
there is too much resignation, is there not?
That is what I have been trying to describe. If they have a living
faith, then they accept suffering without resignation because they
already have understanding, and then it is all right. But if you have a
119

Marie-Louise von Franz

kind of cramped faith, such as people who have to try to believe,
saying, “I must believe because Christ suffered on the cross. I must
accept this suffering”—which is what is preached to them—that does
not help at all. The person is merely preaching to his own
consciousness, and since it is not an experience, it does not help.
How do you interpret the fact that this last picture, which is the
most tragic of them all, has no color? Could you analyze the picture?
There is nothing but the star and two lines.
Answer: It is lifeless. Life is receding.
The feeling experience, yes, emotional participation is receding.
Now what would that mean? In what way do you mean that life is
receding?
Answer: When the little prince and Saint-Exupéry came together there was
a possibility of something real happening.
Yes. I only want to know from what life is receding? At the
beginning there were very highly colored pictures, there was the one
which Saint-Exupéry himself called the “urgent picture.” That was the
one of the baobab trees, which he says he has drawn much better and
which has much more color. And now there is this, quiet without color.
Answer: It is a picture of his microcosm at the moment, a kind of mandala.
No. I would say that it is a picture of the loneliness left after the
departure. The picture shows the crossing point of two sand dunes and
there is the star, the idea being that the prince returned to that star. It is
a picture of the loneliness and lifelessness which is left, but what is bad
about it? It would be normal to feel lonely and lifeless after the little
prince had departed; that is natural.
Answer: It is a desert and there is no life in it, there is nothing growing at
all.
Yes, but that is how it would feel. If the divinity left, that is exactly
how one would feel. I would say that it is the drawing which expresses
his disappointment, and therefore its sadness and emptiness are right,
but what is objectionable about it is that the disappointment is not
more intense. It is a poor and inadequate drawing of a disappointment
and of loneliness. You have to think about it; you cannot get the feeling
of it. Try to make a picture of how you feel when you are deserted by
the gods; try to draw that, and you will see, or I hope so for your sakes,
that your imagination will run in a more vivid way than this. It would
take some artistic effort—but after all Saint-Exupéry was an artist— to
depict the loneliness of the desert. But draw a wide, wide plain, and
get the feeling of the atmosphere into it, its nothingness, and try to
120

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

express the sad coldness of a sky which only has one star looking
down on the earth, with its cold light. You have all seen paintings of
being lost, of despair, which wring your heart, in which you feel all the
lostness and despair and emptiness, but here you don’t. You have to
imagine what he is trying to express. Then you think it must be the
loneliness, but it doesn’t hit you or wring your heart, because there is
no color. Why not have made it all gray? If it had been a sad gray, you
might have got the feeling of it. Why not make the sky so that it
appears as a vast cold orb overhead, so that it chills you to look at the
picture? Here you feel neither sad nor chilled. You have to replace that
reaction by your own thinking. There is something lacking.
Remark: It is just dead.
Yes, it’s dead—it’s not even a disappointment! It does not even
express sadness.
Remark: But the description in the book is full of nostalgia!
Yes the description is, but not the drawing, and though the
description is nostalgic, it is very childish. There is just the hope to get
it back again: “Please send me word.” It suggests a postcard, the
cheapest means, just public help—just like a radio announcement for
some missing person—a request that the next police station be
informed. But, except for the greedy child who wants to have his toy
back and the poor expression of it, it is a very weak good-bye.
Remark: Perhaps he did not realize that it was a god. Otherwise he would
never have asked to be sent word like that!
Quite right! Fancy appealing to the world to send you word—“if
you find my god!”
Remark: You can see the incongruity between his thoughts and his
emotions.
Yes, there you are again confronted with the extinct volcano. The
emotional intensity is not great enough, and that is the dangerous
thing. It is typical of the person who in such tragic situations simply
reacts by saying, “Oh yes, yes!” Sometimes it is pretense, an
understatement. They pretend to have no emotion, but then you can
tell by the cold hands and other symptoms that emotion is there, and
then it does not matter, for it is just pretense. But if they really have no
emotion—when the volcano is burnt out—then it is dangerous.
Remark: I think that Saint-Exupéry himself was quite intuitive and he
thought it was an episode which had to come to an end, just as when he
crashed in the desert. Throughout the book you have the feeling that the
experience is only meant to last for a short time and then will be over, and the
121

Marie-Louise von Franz

flatness in his picture, together with the experience itself, makes me feel that
there is no disappointment because he knew that it would have to come to an
end and he could do nothing about it.
That would place too much weight on the intellect. I think you are
quite right, but that is a morbid reaction. Suppose there is someone
you love and that person dies from an incurable disease, your intellect
knows too! It knows that the experience will come to an end, the
relationship has to end, the doctor has warned you, saying that the
patient will last another three weeks, but that does not mean you have
no other reaction. Even if you know that relationship has inexorably to
come to and end, that doesn’t stop your feeling. That is exactly it! It is
clear that such an experience as Saint-Exupéry had in the desert with
the little prince had come to an end; it belongs to the experience that it
must do so. But that is the weakness of a personality such as SaintExupéry’s. People who cut themselves off from their feelings and the
emotional layer to avoid suffering, replace all that by reflection; they
simply say, “All right, that had to come to an end. Let’s be matter of
fact about it.” If you are able to do that, there is something wrong. If
you can write off an experience just because reason tells you that it
must come to an end, that is an intellectual argument. Reason has a
point and writes off the experience, but for the individual to be able to
do so is a sign of morbidity; it is abnormal. Normal people can see with
their reason that a relationship has to be given up, but they are sad all
the same. Feeling as well as reason has its rights.
Remark: Saint-Exupéry has really been preparing himself for this all along.
There has always been a borderline, but by always preparing himself for it, it
is almost humorous at the end because “it is just another experience to be gone
through and which will come to an end,” That expresses basically his whole
life.
Yes, that is exactly the lack of intensity of feeling. Constant
awareness of the transitoriness of life, and sense of always preparing
for an end before you get there, is typical of the puer aeternus. For
instance, when he makes friends with a girl he knows the ending will
be a disappointment and a parting, so he does not give himself
wholeheartedly to the experience. Instead, he is always getting ready
to say good-bye. As far as reason is concerned, he is right, but then he
does not live; reason has too much to say in his life. He does not allow
for the unreasonable human side which does not always prepare for
the retreat because there will be a disappointment. That shows for lack
of generosity. Why can one not say, “Of course there will be
122

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

disappointment because all experiences in life are transient and may
end in disappointment, but let’s not anticipate it. Let us gives ourselves
with full love to the situation as long as it is there.” The one does not
exclude the other. One need not be the fool who believes in nothing but
happiness and then falls from the clouds, but if one always retreats at
the beginning in anticipating suffering that is a typical pathological
reaction. They try to train themselves not to suffer by always
anticipating suffering. One person said, “I always think ahead of the
suffering to come and like that I am trained against it. I try to
anticipate it in fantasy all the time.” But that is typically morbid and
completely prevents you from living. A double attitude is required:
that of knowing how things are likely to turn out, and that of giving
oneself completely to the experience all the same. Otherwise there is no
life. Reason organizes it ahead of time so that one may be protected
against suffering—in order that one shall not get the full experience,
naively—just when one does not expect it. In that case, reason and
consciousness have taken too much away from life—exactly what the
puer aeternus tries to do all the time. He does not want to give himself
to life and tries to block it off by organizing it with this reason. That is
precisely the morbid disease.
Remark: When you think of the picture of Van Gogh, even the most
melancholy are full of energy and force and emotion.
Yes, even desolation is fully experienced and even what is lost is
fully expressed, in contrast to this. One thinks sometimes how much
more alive such people would be if they suffered! If they can’t be
happy let them be unhappy, really unhappy for once, and they would
become human. But the puer aeternus cannot even be quite unhappy!
He has not even the generosity and the courage to expose himself to a
situation which could make him unhappy. Already, like a coward, he
builds bridges by which to escape—he anticipates the disappointment
in order not to suffer the blow, and that is a refusal to live.
Question: Isn’t it possible to say how the locked-up feelings tends to express
itself, because I suppose it must express itself somehow, the feeling that is
refused must be there?
Here I do not see it, except in the temperamental spontaneity of the
rose.
Question: Is it because the volcano is burnt out that there is none?
I think there is none in him, but you have it in the very
temperamental outburst of the rose, where there is a certain amount of
feeling. She is fully in what she is doing. When she boasts, she boasts
123

Marie-Louise von Franz

thoroughly, and when she is angry she is thoroughly angry, and when
she is haughty she is thoroughly haughty. So she has a certain totality
of expression. She is right in her momentary mood, one could say, and
that at least is something. Apparently that was the case with SaintExupéry’s wife. She was amazingly spontaneous, even to a shocking
extent—she threw herself into instantaneous reactions.
Remark: I think in a negative way it goes through the whole book in the
slight sentimentality.
Yes, that always indicates a lack of feeling, for sentimentality
replaces real feeling. That is another aspect of the picture.
How would you interpret the fact that the little prince wants a little
muzzle for the sheep so that it should not eat the rose? You see how the
thing has to work: he wants a sheep to eat the baobab shoots, and
naturally, if he just lets the sheep loose on the asteroid it will not be
able to distinguish between the rose and shoots and will eat
everything. So the little prince probably plans to put the glass shade
over his rose and let the sheep eat up all the baobab shoots; then put a
muzzle on the sheep and take the shade off the rose, and in that way
keep sheep and rose naively apart! So he needs the muzzle, and as
drawing is a form of creation in his world, he wants Saint-Exupéry to
draw the muzzle which he can put in the box with the drawing of the
sheep and thereby prevent the rose from being eaten. But the strap of
the muzzle gets forgotten in the upset of the departure, and when
Saint-Exupéry suddenly thinks of it afterward he says, “Now what will
happen?” And then he thinks that he will be tortured to the end of his
life by wondering whether the sheep has now eaten the rose or not? To
that question he gets no answer, but it is a thought which will torture
him for now on. How would you interpret this?
Remark: His animal side is not assimilated and there is a danger that it
may become destructive.
Yes, but the more important thing is to remember that you are
dealing with this earth and the Beyond. You will remember that when
we talked of the sheep I spoke of it as being possibly the little mistake
which causes a deadly accident, as, for instance, when there are sheep
on the airfield and the plane lands on one of them and crashes. We
have already spoken of it as representing the mass-man, the crowd
soul. The sheep’s negative aspect is the collectivity of its instinctual
make up. Formerly there were always a few goats among the sheep
because if wolves attacked, the goats did not lose their heads and the
sheep might get away, whereas if a ram were the leader, it would panic
124

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

and the whole flock after him. So to compensate for the stupidity of the
sheep, goats were kept, but the wolves learned to kill the goats first
and then make the sheep panic. If the sheep is the collective thing that
destroys the process of individuation by its collectiveness, it would not
be surprising if it ate the rose.
Psychologically, as a mandala, the rose is also the nucleus of the
process of individuation, and in the book the terrible thing that is
destroyed on the other side—in the Beyond. On this earth the sheep is
not wholly negative; the puer aeternus does need collective adaptation.
He is usually a wrong kind of individualist and does not adapt
sufficiently to collectivity; for instance, most pueri funk their military
service because of not wanting to be sheep. In such cases, it sometimes
does them a lot of good to be sheep and to have to adapt to the
collective. But in this case the collective extends to the star, where there
should not be any sheep. This is a mechanism which is tragic: if one is
too extreme in one’s refusal to adapt, then one gets collectivized from
behind and within; if you pretend to be more individual than you are
and avoid adaptation by thinking you are someone special—with all
the neurotic vanity and being unique and misunderstood by
everybody, and so lonely because so misunderstood, because all the
others are such tough, insensitive, stupid sheep, while oneself is such a
delicate soul—if you have these false pretensions and because of them
do not adapt to humanity, then you will be just the person who is
actually not at all individual.
I have already spoken of the fact that when I talk of the puer aeternus,
people always say they know many of them. They can recall a whole
crowd of such men, which goes to show that the puer aeternus is not at
all original! He is really a very collective type—the collective type of
the puer aeternus, and nothing else. That is, the more he plays a part of
the prince, with the idea that he is something special, the more he is
really an ordinary type of neurotic—a type you could describe
clinically and cover almost the entire personality with such a
description. Precisely because the puer entertains false pretensions, he
becomes collectivized from within, with the result that none of his
reactions are really very personal or very special. He becomes a type,
the type of the puer aeternus. He becomes an archetype, and if you
become that, you are not at all original, not at all yourself and
something special, but just an archetype. This is why sometimes, when
you are confronted with a puer aeternus, you are able to say to him,
“Isn’t that, and that, and that, your philosophy? And haven’t you
125

Marie-Louise von Franz

trouble there, and there, and there? And isn’t this the case with girls?”
And then he replies, “But heavens! How do you know? How can you
know me?”
If you are identical with an archetype, I can describe all your
reactions because an archetype is a definite set of reactions. One can
foretell what a puer aeternus will look like and how he will feel. He is
merely the archetype of the eternal youth god, and therefore he has all
the features of the god: he has a nostalgic longing for death, he thinks
of himself as being something special, he is the one sensitive being
among all the other tough sheep. He will have a problem with an
aggressive, destructive shadow which he will not want to live and
generally projects, and so on. There is nothing special whatsoever. The
greater the identification with the youthful god, the less individual the
person although he himself feels so special. If people are really
schizophrenic and mad and think they are Jesus Christ, then they all
say the same thing.
Jung once had two Jesus Christs in the asylum. He put them
together and introduced them saying, “Here is Mr. Miller. He thinks he
is Jesus Christ, and this is Mr. Meyer and he thinks he is Jesus Christ.”
Then he went out of the room and left them alone, and after a while he
found one sitting in a corner drumming with his finger on the table
and the other was standing drumming on the window. So he asked
them if they had made out who was the real Jesus Christ, and both
turned to him and said, “He is completely megalomaniac!” In the other
each saw it clearly! The diagnosis was correct as far as the other was
concerned.

126

Lecture 6

In order to illustrate The Little Prince, I would like to go into some
practical material. I cannot call it case material because, as you will see,
my contact with this puer aeternus was rather strange; one could not
call it therapy.
It is the case of a young man who, when I first met him, was thirtyone years old. He came from a Central European country, and his
father had had a small florist’s shop and had been a decorator, but he
had committed suicide, shot himself when the boy was six years old. I
could not find out why the father had killed himself, and the boy did
not know. The marriage apparently was very unsatisfactory, and the
boy remembered that there had been constant quarrels. The mother
had brought him up and continued to run the florist’s shop after the
father’s death. The boy himself wanted to become a painter. Actually, I
think he was quite gifted in this way. From the age of about eighteen
he had suffered from a prison phobia to such an extent that he could
hardly go into any town, for as soon as he saw a policeman he became
so frightened that he ran away, thinking he would be arrested and put
into prison. This made life very difficult for him; he was always
running and sneaking around the corner as if he were a persecuted
criminal. He was also very much afraid of the night, and every dusk
was agony to him. He was frightened at the approach of evening, and
at night he couldn’t sleep, and lying awake through the night terrified
him. He also masturbated, one might say, naturally. Another phobia,
which came out much later, was that he could not cross a frontier or a
border of any kind, and it is pretty disagreeable to live in Europe if you
cannot cross a frontier! It was in connection with this difficulty that I
first heard of him.
127

Marie-Louise von Franz

I had gone abroad somewhere and had lectured on some Jungian
theme and afterward received a postcard saying that there were a few
things about my lecture which he would like to discuss with me, and
he also had a personal problem and that he would arrive at such and
such a time and date. Nothing happened. I kept some time for him, but
nobody came! Later I received another postcard, with no apology,
simply saying, “This is me again, and I am coming at such and such a
time.” Again nobody appeared! I found out later that he had gone to
the Swiss frontier and then couldn’t cross it, and so returned home. As
he didn’t want to explain this in writing, he simply didn’t turn up.
Then I received a third postcard, again without an apology, and again
saying that he would be coming, but this time I decided to not keep
any time for him. Then, suddenly, a young man stood at my door and
explained, quite politely, that he had written twice and had not come
because he had been afraid. The only explanation that he could give of
his phobia was that once he had been painting very near the frontier
somewhere without knowing that he was practically on the border and
had been arrested by a frontier guard who had asked him for a
passport. Since he did not have one, he had been locked up, but only
for two or three hours while the guards telephoned his home town to
make inquiries, after which he was let out with many apologies. He
said that the experience had not really frightened or upset him, and
later he confessed that he had had this fear of crossing the frontier
before, so that we cannot take this very seriously; the incident just
reinforced the existing phobia. He also told me vaguely that he had
once some shock treatments and had been in asylum, but I was never
able to find any details, as he did not want to talk about that. In a way,
you could probably call it a post-psychotic case. He had also tried
several Freudian analysts but had always run out on them after two or
three visits. He did not say anything either positive or negative about
that, but simply alluded to the fact. As soon as I tried to ask more, he
would not say anything.
When he appeared at my house he had a tent with him because he
had practically no money, and he wanted to live nearby and consult
me. He was very tall with golden locks and blue eyes. He looked just
like a beautiful young sun-god, and he wore a Jean Cocteau coat and
hood in a heavenly blue, which suited him very well. I talked to him
for a few hours that afternoon and found out what I have told you
above. Then he took his tent to sleep in a field nearby, but in the night
—it was summertime—a thunderstorm came up, and he got so
128

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

frightened on the night of the storm that he had to rush into a hotel,
and so spent the little money he had. He left the next day, and I never
saw him in person again.
In that one short discussion I told him a few things about the puer
aeternus and outlined a few of his problems, which he did not like at
all. I did not expect ever to hear of him again, thinking he would be
just like a meteor in my life, coming and disappearing forever. But
after a fortnight, I received a letter in which he said that he had very
much disliked what I had told him, and had been angry with me and
disappointed that the heroic expenditure to meet me had ended so
badly. Then, afterward, he had thought it over and had come to the
conclusion that after all I was not quite wrong about the things I had
told him, and, moreover, had happened which proved that I was
putting my finger on the right spot. Then he told me the story which I
will tell later. He asked if he might write from time to time and if I
would answer his letters. That went on for about a year during which
time we exchanged only about three letters. Then the correspondence
lapsed. That was about ten years ago, and I knew no more until about
five years ago when I met someone who knew him and said that we
was all right and working at his painting. Since then I heard that he
married and that later he died from cancer at the age of forty-five.
At the end of his first letter, he wrote, in a very challenging kind of
way, that he had a dream shortly after he had left me. He said he could
not make anything of it and he wondered what I would say The dream
was as follows:
I was on the crest of a mountain and was walking
with a girl along the ridge. I did not know the girl.
Two men jumped up from below and attacked me.
During a wild wresting match with them they took
me and threw me down into the gorge below. I had
the feeling that I was lost, but there was a lonely fir
tree in which I got caught and so did not fall to the
bottom of the gorge.
This shows the problem of the puer aeternus in a nutshell. He is too
high up, and that was his attitude. He always wanted the cream of
every experience. He was the Don Juan type and had been with a
number of girls with whom he usually lived for about a fortnight or
three weeks before walking out on them. As soon as things became a
bit too personal and too binding or too committing, he just walked off.
He did not know, or had not realized, that this was an unsatisfactory
129

Marie-Louise von Franz

way of behaving. He thought everybody behaved like that, that that
was the way for a man to live. He was, in a way, completely innocent
about this. The valleys in which people live, jammed together, but also
rooted, held problems about which he knew nothing. For example, he
had never dealt with the money problem. He got some money from his
mother and lived on that somehow, I must say very modestly, saving
money by living in a tent and so on, but he never thought of earning
any himself, in spite of the fact that he was thirty-one. When I
suggested that a sexual relationship with a woman might also be a
human relationship with some feeling and some commitment in it, he
stared at me in amazement, for such a thing had honestly never
occurred to him. He did not like the idea, but at least was quite
innocent about it. That would be the crest of the mountain; if you walk
along the ridge, whichever way you go, you have to go down—you
cannot go higher up, all four sides lead down—which shows his
situation very clearly. He was in a psychological situation where he
could either only get stuck or in some way come down from his height,
which is what I wrote him. It is, however, very dangerous to have a
dream analysis by correspondence with someone whom you do not
know at all, so I kept vague generalities such as, “You are too high up.
To go on like that will simply mean that somewhere, somehow, you
will have to go down,” and I left it to him to make the practical
application, for I did not know what possibilities he had.
He was afraid of the night because, when he was lying awake in the
dark, he often had the hallucination of a big, very strong, primitive
type of man who stood near his bed and stared at him. He said he was
like a boxer, and he would stand and stare steadily at him. This
terrified him. It is obvious that the man represented a split-off part of
his masculinity. He did not look very feminine, but was quite nervous
and anxious and did not go in for any kind of sport. It was clear that
this other man represented a part of the instinctive masculinity which
was lacking. This type of shadow is very common among the pueri
aeterni. On account of the mother complex they are usually split off
from the physical spontaneity of masculinity. In the present case, the
shadow is relatively harmless, and I thought the prospect was not too
bad because such a type is not very dangerous, whereas a really cruel
gangster-type is a highly dangerous shadow.
It is the physical spontaneity that the animus of the mother tends to
split off. Masculine spontaneity is what the mother who intends to
keep, or destroy, her son, instinctively fights. I had an amazing
130

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

illustration of this once. A woman in my neighborhood had a little boy
of four whom the parents gave a watering-can as a Christmas present.
Because it was winter he naturally couldn’t use it, and when he was
given the can he was told not to use it in the sitting-room. The boy
probably would not have thought of this, but now, of course, as soon
as the mother was out, he took the can and sprinkled the carpet. The
mother blew up, ranted and raved, beat the child terribly, making a
fuss out of all proportion. I heard the noise and decided to interfere.
The boy was screaming at the top of his voice. When I asked the
mother what was the matter and she told me the story, I could not help
laughing. I told her that she put the idea in his head and that of course
he could not wait until spring. She said, “Perhaps not, but this
behavior must be stopped because otherwise when he is sixteen, he
will go out and kiss girls.” That was literally her answer! The child had
shown a little bit of spontaneity, of independence and disobedience—
the wish to enjoy life and do something on his own—and the mother
realized that this was the little man in the boy, which must be crushed
at once. Naturally, there is also the symbolism of the watering-can—the
obvious one—which later lead him into kissing girls in the dark at the
age of sixteen. The mother’s fantasy had already anticipated that; she
felt the little man standing up and being spontaneous—and she could
not tolerate that.
There you see how the mother’s animus pounces on these
manifestations, such as coming in with dirty shoes, spitting, using bad
language, or the phase that young boys go through of speaking of
women in a belittling way, as though women were God-knows-what—
despised because one is attracted. Such things are primitive—one
could even say ape-like—manifestations of masculinity. A certain
wilderness is natural in a boy, a certain lack of adaptation, and while
one has to oppose to such behavior to a certain extent, some of it
should be allowed to live. Every mother who has a healthy instinct just
shrugs her shoulders and says, “Oh well, boys are impossible,” or
something like that. But she leaves them alone and tries to ignore what
they do, although she swears a little because it is a nuisance. The
mother, however, revealed exactly what the fantasy was about; she felt
the germ of future independence in her little boy’s action. That is why,
when the mother has “eaten” the son, she had largely destroyed with
her animus such physical manifestations of masculinity as being dirty,
wild, aggressive, and slamming doors. But such things strengthen the
boy’s feeling of being alive.
131

Marie-Louise von Franz

Probably in your youth you have been to Bacchanalian, Dionysian
festivals of wildness where you felt on top of the world and completely
alive, when you felt like you could smash up the whole world. This
feeling of vitality is typical in a healthy young person. It makes one
feel alive and enterprising, and that is what the devouring mother
hates the most. She hates it in the son because that is the impulse of life
which will lead him away from her, unconsciously, as it were. It will
make him forget her which is why, in such a son, one usually finds this
split-off shadow of a gorilla, or a big strong boxer, or a criminal, who
represents the shut-off masculinity. It also compensates for the
weakness of the ego.
In the dream, the shadow figure which turns up is double. Two men
spring at the dreamer and wrestle with him. In general, I have pointed
out before, when a figure appears in a dream in a double form it means
that it is approaching the threshold of consciousness. In this case it also
means something else, namely, that the shadow has a double aspect, a
dangerous and a positive one, for instance a regressive and a
progressive aspect, which in this case is only too obvious. For example,
the shadow figure comes into the life of the dreamer in the form of
homosexual seduction; he could easily have been seduced by a
homosexual man of that strong type. Actually, as we shall find out
later, he had a friend of that type, although nothing homosexual ever
happened between them, but the fascination was rather tinged in this
way. One could say, therefore, that this boxer-shadow is now in a
double constellation in the unconscious. It is either something which
can blend with him and in that case will add to his consciousness and
strengthen the lacking masculinity, or it can remain outside and be
projected, and in that case he will probably become homosexual and
run after this shadow in an outer projected form. So this split-off
content can either destroy him, or can get him into a wrong way of
realizing it, or it can help him. From its behavior, one can see also how
ambiguous this double shadow figure is: the two men throw him
down the side of the mountain. If there had been no fir tree he would
have fallen to his death. If this kind of shadow suddenly attacks egoconsciousness, that is what is responsible for the sudden death, or the
crashes, of the puer aeternus type. This shadow can save him or
possibly destroy him. I have seen cases where the latter happened.
I remember the case of a young man who was completely eaten up
by his mother and was a half girl. He was also a kind of artist, and
terribly unreal. When his parents died and he was left in a difficult
132

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

financial situation, a very cynical, realistic type of cousin turned up
and gave him the opportunity of joining in a scheme to cheat the
insurance company. The young man had never worked before, he had
never faced reality and was suddenly stranded. Then this cousin
appeared and said everybody behaved in a certain way and that he
should just sign the paper and he would get the insurance. He did so,
without quite realizing, morally, what he was doing. He soon landed in
prison. The cynical, realistic cousin had carefully arranged that he
should not appear in it, but the puer aeternus boy sat in prison for
having tried to cheat the insurance company.
Another case where the shadow produced a sudden crash was also
of a mother-bound boy who hitherto, having been kept completely
away from life under a plastic cover, got away from his home for the
first time in his life. He went to a big town and, having never had any
kind of freedom, sexual or otherwise, and always having to be so
overcivilized at home, ran completely wild for a time. He went to the
Friends-of-Nature huts (Natur Freunde)—a communistically inclined
group of young people who live a very free life in the huts—and there
he drank too much and ran completely wild and had a different girl
every night. He switched right over to the shadow side. There would
have been nothing wrong in it, except that he overdid it in a kind of
nervous, hectic way. I only met him once in my life and then saw that
he was absolutely worn out, and his health completely run down. I
warned him, saying that I did not mind what he did, but that he
should not overdo it to such an extent, that he would ruin his health
and was running a great risk. He looked at me mockingly as if I were a
kind of clucking aunt, and that was all the response I got. Three weeks
later he rang me up. He had caught polio and was lame for the rest of
his life. I am sure that the fact that he was in such a poor state of health
had added to the bad outcome of his illness. That is how the shadow,
in practical life, hits the puer aeternus: he either crashes to his death in
an airplane, or dies in a mountain accident, or in a car crash, or he
lands in prison—half-innocently in many cases. Those are all examples
of what falling down the mountain means or what it means to be
thrown down the abyss. So you see this shadow has a double aspect: it
contains the necessary vitality and masculinity but, in addition to that,
a possible destruction—something which might really destroy the
conscious part.
In the boy’s dream, the two shadow figures (he had no associations
to them) fling him down. He has to come down and go deeper, and
133

Marie-Louise von Franz

that might be the right or the wrong thing for him. If he goes too far, it
is wrong, and if, as here, some saving force comes along, it turns out
well. In this dream you can see for the second time what I have already
pointed out to you in The Little Prince material, that in the puer aeternus
the material is very often in a strange way double: the healing and the
destructive factors are close together, and you can interpret everything
almost on a double line. An optimist might say that the puer aeternus
was too high up and that an ambiguous shadow overwhelms him and
throws him down, involuntarily, instead of going of his own free will.
It looks like an accident. Actually, this man, in the state when I saw him
and when he had this dream, was in great danger of death. He could
have died any moment, and therefore, to myself, I gave the dream
fifty-fifty interpretation, which can also be seen in the double figure of
the shadow. We cannot say how it may come out, but we do know that
there is a lysis, a solution, namely, that he does not fall down the whole
slope of the mountain, which would probably have killed him, but that
something stops him half way—an isolated fir tree which stands just
where he falls and in which he is caught.
As you know, there were several mother-cults in Asia Minor and
Syria whose center was the mother-goddess Cybele. She was later
identified with the goddess Aphrodite. Her son, her lover in some
versions, or her priest-lover, was the beautiful youth Attis. When he
became attracted to a nymph and was no longer interested in the
mother-goddess, out of jealousy she drove him into a madness so that
he castrated himself. He did this under a fir tree. According to other
versions he was also executed by Ares, the lover of the mother-goddess
Cybele. We could say that it was the aggressive animus of the mothergoddess which killed or castrated the young god. In Rome, and in
several towns in Asia Minor, there was a spring festival in which the fir
trees were carried in the streets with an image of Attis, generally only
his upper part, hanging in the top of the tree. There are also
mythological versions according to which, after his death, he was
changed into a fir tree himself. All this naturally belongs to the
mythological cycle of the young dying sun-god, and the mourning and
the spring ceremonies connected with the cult of this god. Here the
great problem is the tree. Attis is suspended in the maternal tree, and
Christ suspended in the tree of life, or of death, portrays the same idea.
One could say that Attis regressed into a prehuman form; he became
a tree numen, the vegetable spirit in a tree. He has grown out of the
tree; that is, his life only comes from his mother complex, or from his
134

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

connectedness with the collective unconscious, and he has no living
system in himself. He is like a parasite living on the tree. That is a very
serious thing to consider. There are cases of mother-bound young men
where it is not advisable to try to detach them too much from their
mother complex because they would die. You could say that they can
only survive in that parasitic connection with the maternal tree. If you
put them on the earth as an independent living system, a fruit of the
tree, they cannot survive. They don’t have the vitality to become an
independent individual—which shows that one should approach such
problems without prejudice. If such a man goes about with an elderly
woman, many people say that he is just going about with his mother
and should be thrown into life, and so on. But one should never go on
such common-sense general opinions, which are absolutely
destructive, but follow the dream and the unconscious material, for
only that can show if the detachment from the maternal tree is
possible. If it is not, one is just working for the death of that individual.
The suspended youth in the tree is an ambiguous figure. You can
interpret the dream positively and say that the tree is a symbol of life,
that it is something rooted, which grows, and has a place on the earth.
Taking it in this way, we can say that through the clash with the
shadow the young man is forced into being rooted, into having a place
in life, and into beginning to grow or mature. But if you interpret it
negatively, with the tree (the mother) as a coffin and death, you can say
through the clash with the shadow the young man is thrown back into
the symbol of the death-mother and returns to the source of life,
namely, into the mother—in this case into death. The puer aeternus is, in
a way, the opposite of a tree because he is a creature who flies and
roams about. He always refuses to be in the present and to fight in
there-and-now for his life, which is why he avoids attempting to relate
to a woman. Woman represents a tie to the earth for a man,
particularly if she wants to have children, and a family would forever
tie him to the earth. For the bird that flies about, the puer, the woman is
the tree principle. In accepting this side of life, he accepts the just-so
situation of life, which he constantly tries to avoid. The tree shows
clearly that being tied inevitably means losing one’s freedom to roam
about. The puer aeternus and the tree symbol belong together. The tree
fixates him, fastens him to earth, either in a coffin or in life.
One afternoon when I met the dreamer, he told me principally of his
outer life in a superficial way, without relationship to the unconscious,
and then in the middle of the conversation he pointed out that when
135

Marie-Louise von Franz

he was in a certain town of his home country he once suddenly lost all
his symptoms. He complained that he was afraid of the night, that he
had border and police phobias and how intolerable his life was for that
reason, but when he stayed in this place he had no symptoms: he did
not masturbate, his prison fear vanished, and he had no fear of the
police. Then he looked at me very safely and said that three weeks
later it started again—and even worse. I said that we should look at
those three weeks more closely, that it was always very interesting
when someone temporarily lost their symptoms, because it means that
for a short time the person must have been in a situation where things
were right, which was very important. So I asked him what he had
done during that time. He seemed to ascribe the beneficial influence to
the town and its atmosphere, but then it came out that he had lived
with a girl there, then left her after three weeks and went somewhere
else. I asked him if that was not strange and if he had never made any
connection between the fact that while he was with this girl all his
symptoms had disappeared. Such a thought never occurred to him. I
asked him why he had left, but he said he had just gone. After further
questioning, I got from him the following story, to which I referred
previously.
He had known the girl since his boyhood. She was the daughter of a
rich neighbor, and he had always admired her from afar. She was
introverted and very unapproachable and respectable, and he had
always looked upon her as the beautiful girl whom one admires and
can never get. From his early twenties he had been friends with a very
strong masculine type of man, a sculptor, who in a way resembled the
man of his nightmare. The two were always in contact, and one
evening in the sculptor’s atelier they began talking about this girl and
whether it would be possible to seduce her. The sculptor, who was a
Don Juan type, was quite sure that he could do it—one could get any
woman if one only knew how to set about it. But the dreamer said in
this case it would be impossible, and while they were a bit drunk they
had a bet on it. The dreamer then arranged a meeting. He introduced
her and helped in the situation, and somehow the poor girl got caught
in the plot and the sculptor succeeded in getting her for one night. The
girl must somehow have felt unconsciously that she had stepped into
an intrigue. She realized while with the sculptor that he did not love
her and that the ending was a cold, devilish plot, so after that night she
ran away terrified and completely avoided both men.
The young man got a terrific shock from the fact that the sculptor
136

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

had succeeded with the girl, not only because he had lost his bet. He
did not understand his reaction and did not trouble to think too much
about it. He never tried to contact the girl until later when he met her
again and was with her for three weeks. And that was the time he lost
his symptoms, which returned after leaving her.
In the conversation we had that one afternoon I tried to explain how
I saw the situation, namely, that actually it was he who wanted the girl,
that he was interested in her but didn’t have the courage or the virility
to approach her himself, and so made his shadow friend do what he
should have done. It was so much a projection that he had not realized
that if the shadow friend succeeded in getting the girl, he himself got
nothing out of it! He was so identified with the sculptor that, at the
time of the bet, under the influence of drink, it has seemed as though
he were to get the girl himself. Then, when the sculptor triumphantly
showed the scalp, it dawned on him that he was out of the picture, that
the other fellow had won out and he made the other live his split-off
shadow. To me that was the simple explanation of the shock. Then—
again swimming along in his unconsciousness—he started once more
with the girl and lost his symptoms, but again did not wonder what
that meant.
The girl seemed to me to be a very important factor in his life, for
with her he had once been happy in the normal way, but when I
suggested this he saw me as a match-maker and a witch, so I had to
retreat and say that I did not want to push a relationship with her, but
that I did think it would not be bad if he perhaps carried on the
contact, or tried to think about the possibility of a relationship. But
even that very careful kind of advice made him so mad that he left. He
wrote telling me that it was the one part of our afternoon’s
conversation which finished me for him—apart from the fact that he
had no money.
He sadly returned to his studio and thought that it had not been
worthwhile to see me and waste all that money. But after a fortnight he
decided that perhaps after all there might be something in it, that he
might write to the girl suggesting a meeting—nothing more. At that
time she lived in another town. He wrote in the evening but did not
mail the letter, for he wanted to think it over a little longer. The next
morning when he opened his own letter there was a letter from her!
She had never written to him before and was so introverted that she
had never taken the initiative in any way, so it struck him
tremendously that he, the evening before, had made up his mind to
137

Marie-Louise von Franz

write to her but had not mailed the letter and that very morning had
received a letter from her. Both made the same proposition in their
letter—that they should meet once more. As there was a national
festival day during the next week, why shouldn’t they spend it
together? The girl put in practically the same words as those he had
written. That was a typical synchronistic event. Of course he knew
nothing about synchronicity, but that hit him and clicked and had a
very convincing effect. That is when he thought perhaps I had not been
quite so wrong. He forgave me and wrote about the whole thing. If this
event had not taken place, he would never have resumed contact with
me because he was disgusted with that I had said.
The two met on this summer day and went on a bicycle trip. They
stopped at the edge of a wood and lay down in the grass. He put his
head on her arm and, strangely enough, while actually lying in her
arms, he had a little nap during which he had the following archetypal
dream:
He was standing at the edge of a cliff. [He made a
drawing in the letter, showing himself standing at the
edge of the cliff looking down into the valley below—
it is much the same as the Grand Canyon with the
plain on either side.] He looked down: there were
white cliffs on both sides of the valley; at the bottom
of the valley were the heavens with the sky and the
stars, not water or earth but the sky and the stars. He
crawled down very slowly toward the valley, making
movements with his legs as though he were bicycling
in order to slow up the slow descent still more and
[he had bicycled quite a while before, so in part it is
the continuation of a physical stimulus when he
bicycles in his dream, but there is a deeper meaning]
to keep his balance. There is a certain amount of
anguish, and he is a little afraid of what is happening,
but he is still in control of the situation. He has the
feeling that there is something near him but it is very
blurred; it might be a dog. Suddenly below, there is a
sort of explosion, the welling up of an enormous
outburst of light. The light spot is quite flat and he
has the feeling that he is absorbed in it, but he
continues to fall down through the air.
Then there comes a change in the dream where the
138

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

whole thing disappears and below him he no longer
sees the sky but rather a quadrangular pattern as you
see a landscape from an airplane, with the fields in
rectangular patterns. There are no trees. Then there
comes another shift when he is again in the same
landscape and at the bottom of the valley there is
stagnant water. It is gray and dirty, and does not
reflect. He wakes up and says to himself: “I am not
afraid, but this water is a symbol of the mother and I
don’t want to fall into that. [He had some Freudian
analysis so he knew that he had a mother complex,
and so on, but only in a narrow Freudian sense of the
word.] It is like ice at the bottom of the valley and it
does not mirror.” [He repeats that twice.] He is a bit
afraid. Suddenly there it is again this spark of light
appearing at the bottom of the valley. It is quite
round, but the borders are a bit blurred. It explodes
like a soap bubble, and in the spot he sees a skull and
thinks to himself, “How funny! What does death
mean in all this? What does death mean here?” He is
not terribly afraid but is still falling slowly at the
same spot [which means that he is falling and not
falling; it is a dream paradox]. Then the whole thing
disappears and is replaced by a floor covered with
linoleum at the bottom of the valley. It is yellow
linoleum with brown spots. [At first it was the sky
with light stars, and now there is a yellow linoleum
with brown spots on it.] The landscape has
completely lost its gigantic proportions, and he asks
himself what a piece of linoleum is doing at the
bottom of the valley? [This is really surrealistic.] He
can see it all very clearly. He laughs a little about the
idea of the linoleum.
He then added, in his letter, that he did not like linoleum; he thought it
cold and not aesthetic. It was very difficult to get the associations.
Those he did not write voluntarily I could not get, so I had to make do
with what he gave in his rather superficial letters, and that was all he
said about linoleum.
This dream contains in a nutshell the problem of the drama of the
puer aeternus who has to come down into life. Usually a landscape in
139

Marie-Louise von Franz

dreams, especially if it is worked out with so much detail and love as
in this case, can be said to be a soul-landscape. It mirrors an aspect of
the dreamer’s psyche. This is seen in the paintings of the Romantic
period in which the landscape takes on the qualities of the
temperament of the painter—a storm coming up or the peace of
evening or a dark, threatening forest. These typical landscapes are
attractive and, in a way, mirror certain moods or convey a certain
psychological atmosphere. Therefore, where there is a worked-out
description of a landscape in a dream, it can always be taken as a
description of the psychological situation. Here again, as with the
dream of the crest of the mountain, he has come to the edge, to the end.
He cannot go further in the way he is now going, which is why he
alighted so briefly in my neighborhood—really like a bird lighting on a
tree and flying off again. He felt he had come to an end and could not
go on as before. He has one split in his psyche, a very deep one. But
from a clinical viewpoint it is important to note that his is not a typical
schizophrenic landscape. In the landscapes made by schizophrenics
there are several splits: there will be canyons here and there, indicating
that the earth of conscious reality is falling apart. In one way, the case
of this young man is not psychotic because there is only one split—the
earth is not falling apart. I have often seen this type of split in
compulsion neurosis, which are frequently diagnosed as being
borderline psychosis. There you often find the very deep split, but only
one, and naturally that is more hopeful because there is only one
problem. In this case, you can say there is one big problem behind his
border-frontier phobia but that the whole structure is not dissolving.
I have naturally not commented on the symbolism of this man’s
phobia because I thought it obvious: the policeman putting him in
prison, and the frontier. When he has to go over the border into
another country, then he projects the idea that now he is going to fall
into the hole in his psyche. The prison phobia is very obvious too. He
is like a bird—he never gets pinned down to earth anywhere; he never
stays anywhere, either with a girl or in his profession or anywhere else.
He doesn’t even stay in the same town all of the time but wanders
around with his tent. So the prison is the negative symbol of the
mother complex (in which he sits all the time anyhow), to it would be
prospectively just exactly what he needs, for he needs to be put into
prison of reality, but he is in the prison of his mother complex, so it is
prison anyway, wherever he turns. He has only the choice of two
prisons, either that of his neurosis or that of his reality; thus he is
140

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

caught between the devil and the deep blue sea. That is his fate, that is
the fate of the puer aeternus altogether. It is up to him which prison he
prefers: that of his mother complex and his neurosis, or being caught in
the just-so story of earthly reality.
He now comes into a situation where he is confronted with his inner
split. He is slowly falling, and while doing so, in order to stop the rate
which he is falling, he makes bicycling movements with his legs. There
might be sexual implication in this too, but there may also be a
psychical stimulus because he was cycling before for several hours.
Beyond that, there is also something positive in the sense that he keeps
moving. He does not just passively sink into the situation—he
maintains a certain amount of movement himself—and in that way his
fall is slowed down. That is very important, for whenever an
individual falls into the inner split—a depression or an inner accident,
so to speak—if the ego complex can keep a certain amount of activity,
can keep moving, the danger is less. This is often done instinctively by
people when they are going off into a psychotic episode. One of the
last attempts to save themselves—I have seen it in several cases—is
that they try feverishly to write all their fantasies. They write day and
night and keep on and on until they snap, which seems rather crazy,
but it is really a last attempt to keep a certain amount of initiative, to
keep going with the ego complex and to do something about the flood
of unconscious material by separating it and putting it down on paper.
The ego complex is drowning, but still has an instinctive need to
struggle and keep moving.
If one can encourage that, it is sometimes possible to bridge the
dangerous moment, for as long as the ego keeps a certain amount of
initiative it does not just sink completely and inertly into the
unconscious. If we link with this the actual situation, the very fact that
the man went on a bicycle trip with the girl was such a movement.
Instead of waiting till his bad fate caught up with him, for once he met
the relationship half-way and showed some enterprise by making a
constant with the girl on a feeling level. That was the moment which
kept him from falling completely into his split. You will notice that
during the whole dream he keeps on repeating that he is not afraid, or
that he is only a bit afraid. Such insistence always means that people
are afraid. The very fact that he has to keep on asserting that he is not
afraid shows his tremendous fear of falling into the split, but, with a
kind of auto-suggestion, he tries to keep his head.
This is a great improvement on the other dream in which he was
141

Marie-Louise von Franz

thrown down into the gorge by the shadow and was saved by sheer
chance. This time he keeps a certain amount of movement himself, and
that slows the fall. You see how important it is not to push a man
caught in this kind of constellation too abruptly into reality, because
that might constellate being thrown down by the shadow. It is as if an
airplane, too high up, were running out of fuel, and to avoid a crash
had to land slowly. That is the great problem with such cases—on the
one hand helping them approach reality and the other not pushing
them too much because there is the danger of crashing. That dream
shows it very delicately, how one can fall slowly, like a parachutist, but
also shows that this man has such a severe split that he needs very
careful handling.
The crash-landing means what I explained before when speaking of
the young man who had polio, or the young man who landed in
prison. It can also happen completely inwardly, not visibly and
physically outside. Then, instead of being a brilliant puer, such a man
suddenly becomes a cynical, disappointed old man. The brilliance has
turned into cynicism and the man is too old for his age. He has neither
belief nor interest in anything any longer. He is absolutely and
thoroughly disillusioned and thereby loses all creativeness and élan
vital, all contact with the spirit. Then money, ambition, and the struggle
with colleagues become paramount, and everything else disappears
with the romanticism of youth. There is often an embittered expression
on the face of such a man. Here I might give you a dream which
illustrates that situation very clearly.
A very romantic young man of the Don Juan type, with a positive
mother complex, married and built up a profession. He decided to go
back with his wife and children to the town where his parents lived.
Naturally, as had to happen, there were the usual quarrels between
wife and parents-in-law. The man had a good sexual relationship with
his wife but not much human contact with her, and he did not really
know her. He also had tremendous illusion about his own mother,
whom, because of his positive mother complex, he had idealized, as he
idealized his wife. When he unfortunately got into the situation where
the two women started fighting, he couldn’t help but be very
disappointed by the way in which quarreling women behave: lies and
slander and outburst of affect, both of them pulling him apart and
telling him poisonous things about the other—the usual weapons
which women use in such situations. He literally fell out of the clouds
and wrote everything off, drowned himself in work and just tried to
142

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

ignore the fighting cats who made his life a hell. Instead of shouting
from time to time at one or the other, he took very little stand himself
and when I met him again I was absolutely shocked at the change in
him. He was a disappointed, pale-faced old man with a bitter
expression. I asked him how his work was, and he said that it was
going well and that he had a lot to do. Then the whole story came out.
Consciously he was not disappointed. He thought that was just life
and that he had dealt with the situation quite all right, but he had not
realized the shock to his feelings. Then he told me the follow
absolutely archetypal dream:
He came into a strange town where there was a
prince who had loved a beautiful woman, but she
had become a film-star and left him, and he was now
engaged to a second woman. It was doubtful,
however, whether he loved her as much. It looked as
if he still loved the film-star, to whom he had just
given, as a kind of farewell present, a jewel he had
made for her —a huge diamond in the form of a tear.
Then suddenly the dreamer was standing in the street
of this strange town, and he saw the prince walking
by away with the second woman, with his arm
around her. A lot of cars were racing by, and the
dreamer thought the couple would be run over, but
they succeeded in crossing the street. Then, in a
rather slummy part of the town, they went into a
dark backyard. Dark men jumped out of a nearby
building, intending to attack the prince. But there
came a shift in the story, and the dreamer himself was
lying sprawled on the pavement, knocked out but not
dead, and wondering if the attackers were still
around or whether help would come.
There you see that the prince is the archetype of the puer aeternus with
whom the dreamer is no longer identified. He has fallen out of
identification with the prince and is no longer a puer aeternus; now the
prince is an autonomous figure within him. Let us say that ten years
before he had been a prince himself, a typical puer aeternus, but now he
has come into reality, has disidentified with that archetype. However, it
is still alive in his psyche, independent from the ego. When the ego has
disidentified, then the figure which before was a mixture of the
infantile shadow and the Self becomes a symbol of the Self. The
143

Marie-Louise von Franz

association he gave me was that the prince had loved a beautiful
woman who had now become an American film-star and gone
completely into cheap extraversion.
This is a normal development where one part of the anima seduces
the man into life—that was the part which had seduced him into
marriage, into a career and into getting involved with life, founding a
family, finding a big flat, and so on. With a part of his will-to-live he
had been fascinated into life, so to speak. That was all right, but it left
out the romantic prince within him, who could not follow into this part
of life. So the prince chose another woman as his fiancée, which would
mean that now another part of the anima—probably not the
exogamous but the endogamous aspect—is linking itself with the Self.
Often, in the development of the anima, youths, perhaps when at
school, have a girlfriend they admire but can’t marry because they are
not yet of an age to do so. Subsequently they marry another type. Then
later in life—say between forty and fifty—this admired anima-imago
frequently turns up again and generally plays the symbolic inner role
of being the one who leads to the Self. This aspect of the anima takes
on the role of Dante’s Beatrice, namely, that of the leader into the inner
secret. The other part of the anima which gets projected onto a real
woman is what seduces the man into marriage and into life. So you can
say that there is an aspect of the mother-image of the anima which
leads into exogamous marriage and with that, generally, into
involvement with the other life, and there is an endogamous aspect of
the same image which remains within and later becomes the guide
toward the realization of the inner life. The new fiancée of this
disappointed man would be the endogamous aspect of the anima, but
she is nondescript, not yet clear, and he has not yet grasped what she
means.
The prince gives a diamond in the form of a tear to the film-star,
who is leaving. This clearly expresses his sorrow at her departure and
also alludes to the fact that he still values her highly and is tragically
upset by her departure. Probably he would still cling to her if she had
not left. Although this man had an expression of deep sadness and
bitter disappointment, he had not realized how profoundly he was hit
by the disappointment in his past life, how much he felt betrayed by
the fact he was now involved in the human, all too human, ordinary
life of this planet. The prince in him was, in a way, still longing for that
lost élan vital which had seduced him into life and which had now
faded. Then the prince has to cross a street, which means that now,
144

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

when he connects with this new form of the anima, an inner one, he is
nearly run over by a lot of cars.
In our civilization we still have a Weltanschauung that approves of
the young man who leaves his parents and goes off and starts a family.
In the present case, the mother resists that, but the collective attitude
approves of this kind of development. When a man turns to the inner
life, however, then the pace of outer life works against him because it
demands the he should go on building up a career, seeking more
money and a better position, striving to become the Boss and superBoss. Here, however, the dreamer in the middle of life ought to give
that up and turn to another sphere of life. He is not supported in this,
but threatened by the speed and demands of outer life. In reality the
dreamer was in a situation where he was completely overworked. He
was very successful, and it was hard for him to see that he nevertheless
had the face of an embittered old man.
The prince is not destroyed by the mechanical speed (that is, the
dreamer’s occupation, indicated by the traffic in the dream). He has
the courage to go into the darkness of a city backyard, which means
into his inferiority and human misery, to the inferior function—to
poverty and dirt, where the dogs eat out of dustbins, cats mate, women
gossip, and so on. The backyard represents the hidden life of the big
city—a beautiful image of the neglected unconscious. As if in a fairy
tale the prince must now enter the darkness of this aspect of life, and in
this moment the gangster-shadow attacks the archetypal prince.
This shows the great danger within the psyche of the dreamer, the
danger that he will cynically throw away his secret longing for a sense
of meaning. Actually, he had already begun to do that. His cynicism is
now attacking his inner prince and he is in danger of giving up the
search for an inner ideal or truth, or for what he once had felt was the
aim and meaning of his life. And then, suddenly, he is in the situation
of the prince himself and lies helplessly on the ground. I told him then
that he was just awfully “down,” depressed. He could not answer for
about five minutes, surprised by the idea. I said, “Well, you are just
lying on the ground, just knocked down by the situation and don’t
know what to do. You feel helpless and you had better realize it
because then you might do something about it. You might get up and
call for help or find people who would pick you up, or something like
that.” That clicked with him at once, and he saw it. The dream really
wanted him to realize that nothing could happen until he saw how
deeply disappointed and depressed he was by the situation as it had
145

Marie-Louise von Franz

developed.
That is a typical midlife situation and crisis of a puer aeternus who
has successfully moved out of his puer neurosis but is now confronted
by a second difficulty. It is always like that, for once you feel you have
solved a problem, just wait! The other comes round the corner at once.
So this man had not pulled out for more than about two years when
the wheel was turned around by the unconscious, and he had again to
reevaluate the whole thing and do just the opposite. He was very
angry when he heard this interpretation, but it clicked. There you see
the danger of crashing or falling down: if you have succeeded at falling
down, you are not at the end of the story, you just have to get up again.
Falling down in only one rhythm in life. First the glorious spark is like
a star falling from heaven into the mud. But then it has to rise out of
the mud.
Now we come to the abnormal theme of the young man’s other
dream, the theme of the stars below. However, this is such a
complicated subject that I would rather discuss it next time. You can
take it simply as the old image of the earth being flat instead of a
sphere. At one time it was supposed that the earth was like a pancake,
or something shaped like that, and when there was a split in it you
could see the stars below. From the dream you can draw one
conclusion, namely, that the dreamer had a flat world. His reality was
not round but flat, which was true. There were no dimensions and no
polarities in his psyche, as can be seen by the way in which he walked
into and out of situations and into and away from relationships with
girls, never wanting to waste a thought on them. Naturally his life
lacked any kind of conflict or polarity and was just flat.

146

Lecture 7

We stopped last time at the motif of the stars below. He looked down
into the valley below and saw that much was being transformed there,
but what he first noticed was the stars. I mentioned that his world of
consciousness was not round but flat. Just as a matter of synchronicity,
I might tell you that I read in the paper the other day of a Member of
Parliament who said that there were still people in England who
thought that the world was flat. This man had received a letter stating
that there was a Club consisting of twenty-four people who still
believed this! From the photograph in the paper you could see that
that man’s world certainly was flat. Our dreamer’s world is also flat, so
to speak: his personality is not rounded and his field of consciousness
is like thin ice over the abyss of the collective unconscious. He has not
yet built up any solid reality of his own. You could also call it the
picture of his ego-weakness. In the middle of this flat world there is a
huge split, and he sees the stars below, as if you could see through the
firmament below.
There is a famous alchemical dictum which says:
Heaven above,
Heaven below,
Stars above,
Stars below.
All that is above
Also is below.
Grasp this

147

Marie-Louise von Franz

And rejoice12.
I was once reminded of this saying, whose origin we do not know—
only that it comes from an antique Hermetic writing—but we have to
try to find out what it means. In general, the stars can be interpreted as
the archetypes of the collective unconscious, as nuclei in the dark sky
of the psyche. We see them as luminosities, as single lights, and usually
they are interpreted as gods or archetypal contents. For instance, the
Lord of Sabaoth is the Lord of Hosts (that is, of the heavenly army)
because it was thought that the stars were his army, the soldiers of
God, and that God led this heavenly army. Then there is the theory of
the stars as the individual gods; the order in which they are
constellated would then represent the secret order of the contents of
the collective unconscious. In mythology there are also the motifs of
the many eyes or the many stars. The dragon Argos, for example, is
covered with eyes, and that is also sometimes projected onto the sky.
The Zodiac was thought of as a huge snake of a kind, a kind of
Uroboros biting its own tail, and was represented as being covered
with stars. In Gnostic treatise, the oldest representation of the Uroboros
is that of a snake eating its own tail, the head part speckled with stars
and the rest black, thus illustrating the double nature of the
unconscious totality with a dark, nefarious aspect and a light aspect
characterized by the stars. Exactly the same representation is to be
found in the alchemical treatise of the so-called Codex Marcianus, in
which there are drawings that characterize the “whole in one.”
The tail of the Uroboros is the material and dangerous end and is
very often the seat of the poison (quite in contrast to a real snake). The
head part is the light, spiritual aspect. That was projected onto the sky
because the Uroboros always appeared at the border of human
knowledge. In antiquity, for instance, it was believed that the ball of
the sky was this huge Uroboros snake; on it constellated the signs of
the Zodiac. In the flat form of the world the ocean circled the earth in
the form of a round snake biting its tail. In old maps the Uroboros
stood for the outermost circle, and whenever a man reached the end of
his field of consciousness, he projected that type of snake. Whenever
he came to the point where he could say that he did not know what
was beyond, there would be the picture of the snake with the stars on
it. You see how much the star motif has to do with unconsciousness,
12

See “The psychology of the Transference,” The Practice of Psychotherapy, CW
16, par. 384.
148

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

especially with the collective unconscious.
Why do alchemists say:
Heaven above,
Heaven below,
Stars above,
Stars below.
All that is above
Also is below.
Grasp this
And rejoice?
If we look at this naively, we see that it must have to do with a double
aspect of the collective unconscious which is above and below us, as
though it surrounds us in two forms. Again and again in the
interpretation of dreams and mythological material, people make the
mistake of identifying with what is above consciousness and what is
below with the unconsciousness, the Unterbewusstsein—that which is
below consciousness—implying that consciousness is what is above. If
in a dream one goes downstairs, that is taken as going into the
unconscious, and going upstairs is going into consciousness. That is
superficial nonsense. If you look at the mythological maps of the
world, you see that above there is a realm consisting of the mysterious,
the unattainable for human beings, where the gods live. In Greece
there is Mount Olympus, with the gods above and below. In Sumer
and Babylon there is a myth about a man who tries to fly up to heaven
with the eagles, but he is incapable of transcending a certain barrier
above. He is hit by the gods and falls down, and he encounters the
same difficulties and obstacles in going down to the gods below.
Speaking in spatial terms, if we are objective we have to admit that
there is a field of consciousness both above and below us. This same
duality applies to the symbolism of the house. The cellar often
represents the unconscious in some form, the area of the drives, the
instincts; there are innumerable dreams in which coal is in the cellar
and there is a fire, or awful animals are in the cellar or burglars have
broken in. But exactly the same things happen in the attic. For instance,
a crazy person, overwhelmed by the unconscious has “bats in the
belfry” or “mice in the attic.” Ghosts usually rattle their chains in the
attic and walk about over our heads. So up in the attic, where it is dark
and full of cobwebs and we are a bit crazy, there is just as much a
realm of unconsciousness as in the cellar. People frequently dream of
thieves getting in from the roof or of demons sitting up there and
149

Marie-Louise von Franz

taking off the tiles, and so on.
We must therefore look at the above and below from a different
standpoint and see if there is any kind of qualitative difference
between representations of the unconscious powers below. There are
exceptions , but it can be said that in general the above is associated
with what is masculine—ordered, light and sometimes spiritual—and
the below with the feminine—fertile, dark (not evil; there are no moral
designations in the original mythological counterpositions), chaotic,
and the realm of the animals. The sphere above is connected with birds
and angels—with winged beings which have to do with the spiritual
word. For instance, if in a dream something comes from below, you
might expect it to come up in the form of an emotion or a physical
symptom such as sleeplessness, or some affective disturbance of the
sympathetic nervous system. Or it comes in the form of synchronistic
occurrences in the outer world. If an invasion from the unconscious
comes from above, it can take the form of an enthusiasm for
Communism or Nazism; such an “above” unconsciousness erupts into
the system in the form of a collective idea. If it is characterized as
positive, then it can be said to be the Holy Ghost; if it is considered
negative, then there are the winged demons, bats in the belfry, and
other pernicious winged creatures—that is, destructive ideas. Whether
constructive or destructive, such ideas have a strong collective energy
of their own. Dynamic representations belong to the “above” aspect of
the unconscious and the emotional, instinctive representations to its
“below” aspect.
Egyptian mythology is an exception to this formulation because in it
certain aspects are inverted: thus, as far as sexual symbolism is
concerned, the heavens above are feminine and the earth below is
masculine. This probably has to do with the Egyptian concept of life
being inverted: the main value was placed on life after death and little
value on life in this world. For instance, the amazing pyramids were
built in connection with life after death, but until the very end of the
Syncretistic Period, except for the king’s palace, no decent houses
existed for the living. To the Egyptians ideas where concrete and real,
while actual lifeforms were abstract and therefore masculine. Studying
Egyptian religion, one is struck by what could be called the concretism
of ideas. For example, the idea of immortality had to be realized by the
chemical treatment of the corpse as to preserve it for the longest time.
We consider immortality as being symbolic, but to the Egyptians it was
not (as in very primitive magic), and the preparation of the mummy
150

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

was meant to establish immortality. This shows the concreteness of the
idea. To the ancient Egyptian, the earth was masculine, whereas the
spirit and the idea were concrete. While these conceptions were
specific to Egypt, there are traces of this reversed constellation in some
other civilizations. Therefore, whenever above and below appear, we
have to think in a qualitative way and study the context carefully, not
simply identify what is above with consciousness and what is below
with the unconscious.
In his paper “On the Nature of the Psyche,” Jung compares the
psyche to a color spectrum, with the infrared at the one end and the
ultraviolet on the other.13 He uses this simile to explain the connection
between psyche and body—the archetypes and the instincts. Our
consciousness is like a ray of light, with a nucleus in it to represent the
ego, a kind of field of light that can shift along the spectrum. The
infrared end would be where things become psychosomatic and finally
end in physical reactions. At the infrared end, the psyche is somewhat
connected (we do not yet know exactly how) with physical processes,
so that its activity loses itself, or slowly enters, physical processes of
some kind—psychosomatic and then somatic. This would be the end
representing the body. At the other end, the ultraviolet end, would be
the archetypes. From within we do not know what the body in itself is
—or from without either—except to a certain extent. Here there is a big
question: the mystery of the living organism. At the ultraviolet end is
the mystery of that same thing interested in representations, realized as
ideas, emotions, fantasies and so on, of which it is the source.
As you know, the origin of dynamic fantasies and ideas that come
up in our psyche is unknown, but we ascribe such fantasies to the
activity of the archetypes. Probably these two poles are in some way
connected, although we do not know how. Possibly they are two
aspects of the same reality. At one end there is the body, and at the
other are the ideas and representations that suddenly seize upon the
human mind. Our consciousness generally shifts between the two
poles. We know that somatic processes and physical behavior are
directed by the instincts. To name a few of the most ordinary: the
sexual instinct, with its play of hormones in the body and its physical
aspects; the instinct of self-defense—automatic fighting gestures; the
instinct of running away, a part of the instinct of self-preservation,

13

The Structure and Dynamics of the Psyche, CW 8, pars. 343ff.
151

Marie-Louise von Franz

which takes over automatically in certain life situations, as when we
run away from danger or the reflex action of withdrawal on contacting
a burning object—an automatism of the body that we could call
instinct.
The difference between instinct and archetype is the following:
instinct is represented by physical behavior, similar in all human
beings, while archetypes are represented by a mental form of
realization, similar in all human beings. Thus, homo sapiens mate in the
same way, die more or less in the same way, run away, and stand erect,
all over the world. But there are certain are certain patterns of behavior
which characterize us as different from other animals. Homo Sapiens
also tend to have emotions of the same kind, ideas of the same kind,
religious reactions of the same kind, seen best in the dream of
mythological motifs which are similar all over the world. So at the one
end are the instincts and at the other the corresponding inner
experiences connected with the instincts.
Jung does not assert it with certainty, but he says he has not yet met
an archetypal constellation which does not have a corresponding
instinct. Take the archetype of the coniunctio, which appears in all the
myths of the origin of the world—the mating of a male and female god
and the creation of the world, or being together in an eternal embrace,
as Shiva and Shakti. It appears in the mystical experience of the union
of the soul with God as a coniunctio in a feminine or masculine form,
and exists in most religious symbolism. The corresponding physical
instinct would be the sexual instinct. Self-preservation in the form of
fighting is connected with the archetypal idea of the shadow or the
enemy, the dangerous counterpart, the figure which appears in dreams
as the attacker or the person from who one runs. On the physical side
that would be represented by the instinct, or to run away, which is
physically inborn in us.
It seems, therefore—for so far we have not met with any expectation
—that every archetypal content has a counterpart in some form of
instinct. This is a way of looking at things; that is, instincts are what we
see from the outside, while representations—ideas and dream fantasies
and images—are what we observe from within. If we observe the
human being from the outside (we can photograph it in all its actions)
then we get the infrared aspect. Nowadays anthropology concentrates
on what the human being does in contrast to other animals; how it
mates, builds its adobe, fights and survives and so on. Some writers try
to describe humans objectively, as though we were just one species of
152

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

animal, as compared with elephants, tigers and other creatures. In this
way one obtains a scientific photograph of instinctual human behavior
which is absolutely correct. But if one follows up the same thing from
within, which is what we do, we observe what wells up in the human
being—ideas and representations—and we thus have an anatomy of
the human being photographed from within, an introspective picture,
by which we discover the realm of the archetypes. In an unknown way,
the two are probably one, the same reality observed from outside and
from within. If we now adopt the idea presented in mythology of
human consciousness and the unconscious as being between two poles
—the heavenly pole above and the underworld pole below—we might
compare this to the scientific model of the psyche and call it the
infrared end of the spectrum and the “heavens below” and the other
end the “heavens above.”
Our dreamer is in the middle field of consciousness, and through
the break he can see the heavens below. The movement of the dream is
to make him sink down into that. One should also remember how the
little prince had to come down to earth, investigating, or rather
rejecting, certain qualities on his way down. Usually, the puer aeternus
is too caught up in the realm of archetypal representation. Through his
mother complex he is generally possessed by it, which means that he
underestimates living experiences, the infrared realm. It is quite a
different thing if I think about a steak or if I eat it: the thought of the
steak and sauce béarnaise can be delightful, but if you eat it you will
have still other experiences. The same is true for the archetypes of the
coniunctio. It is certainly one thing to fantasize about a love affair and
try to imagine every detail of the experience, but the actual living
experience is different.
The puer generally tends to avoid the immediate friction of
realization. He does not go into the heavens below, which he
underestimates, and along with that the instinctual realization of life.
That is why the little prince meets the fox on earth and needs the
sheep, but, as you know, in that case the realization of the heavens
below did not work out. This is a generalization, however, and the puer
does sometimes live a certain amount of the instinctual life, but he
blocks off the psychological realization, so to speak. He lives his
experience automatically, as a split-off shadow affair. In that form his
archetypal fascination with the idea of the great love and the coniunctio
remains a wishful fantasy—one day he will meet the woman who will
bring perfect love, perfect warmth, perfect harmony, a lasting
153

Marie-Louise von Franz

relationship, and so on—clearly a mother-image illusion. In the
meantime he does not abstain from sexual contacts, for that would
frustrate him too much, so he has twenty or thirty affairs with women,
as in this case, but he does not let himself be affected by them. He does
not live the thing through. You could say of such people that they are
as innocent, in the wrong kind of way, as though they had not lived at
all, because they live it without being in it. They make a mental
reservation, saying to themselves that this isn’t it but that meantime
they need a woman. Then they have the physical union, but it does not
count mentally or in the inner aspect of fantasy, in the feeling of the
man himself. If it is not taken seriously, if one does not let the impact of
the experience touch the psyche, then it is as though it had not been
lived.
I once analyzed a professional prostitute who was exactly like an old
maid. Her dreams always showed untouched little girls or women
who had never had any sexual experience. This was completely true!
She shut herself off from what she lived. She just wanted the money,
she was not in it—for she admitted to herself neither the pleasure of
certain aspects nor her disgust over others. She made a rational
decision that she needed the dollars and said to hell with the rest of it.
Thus she was, in a way, untouched by life. Though she had rather
severe psychic symptoms, she was not miserable. One of the results of
the analysis was that she suddenly realized her own miserable
condition, which she had not seen before. It was all carried on by
intellectual decision, and she never admitted that certain men
disgusted her and others attracted her, for that would have disturbed
business. Therefore, though she was really a very emotional woman,
she did not allow herself to have the emotional experience of what was
happening, for if she had done so she would have earned less money
by refusing certain men.
The same thing happens sometimes with the puer aeternus. Although
he lives the instinctual side, he does so in a cut-off way. He makes an
artificial emotional barrier, separating what he is living from his real
self. In such a case the stars below are not realized, so the dream says
to take them and enjoy them. Life is incomplete if you live it in its
fantasy aspect; it has to be lived through on the instinctual level. But
that means really accepting it, letting yourself be hit by the experience
and not limiting it by living it in a conditional way. To have a mental
reservation about it means that it is not lived at all, and that is why the
puer aeternus is sometimes cut off from the stars below, and why the
154

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

solution for the dreamer is that he should sink into that world.
Remark: H.G. Baynes once told me that a friend of his made a psychological
investigation of Parisian prostitutes. He discovered that, without exception,
they all had major father complexes and that they made a condition; they
“cut” in some way, perhaps that the man should not kiss them on the lips, or
something like that, but they had this reservation.
Yes, so as to cut off feeling and the emotional experience of what
was happening. Like that you can have the most adventurous life, but
it doesn’t count.
I think, therefore, that the stars below therefore mean the living
experience of the instinctual or archetypal pattern. One has to live
through before one is able either to know oneself or to realize what the
thing is.
Remark: So often it happens that people such as this man you mention, who
are regarded as pueri aeterni by their associates, are very much envied as
being able, instead of cutting themselves off from life, of throwing themselves
into life with great vigor so that they appear to be living successful lives. We
could say that was the shadow and say that we know they are really cut off.
But how do they achieve this appearance of so a vigorous life?
They can act! Many people are actors, and to act something simply
means to play a part. Those people, as far as I have come to know
them, play a part even to themselves, so as to convince themselves that
they are living. Then they land in analysis and have to confess that this
is not the case and that they are not happy. Others may consider them
successful, but they themselves do not feel so. The criterion is simple:
Do you feel that you are living? Those who do not feel alive describe it
as being though they were acting, even for themselves.
Remark: Or wearing costumes!
Yes, and people fall for that, unless they know some psychology and
look at the eyes to see the real expression. Then one can tell that
something is wrong, even though such people seem to be so successful.
Remark: If one were fixed at the ultraviolet end and had numerous
experiences at the other end, then I suppose the ultraviolet end would be too
beautiful for the infrared end. Even though there might be nineteen
experiences, they would be sordid and miserable because one would always be
looking for the ultraviolet?
Yes, exactly. That is a good way to put it. You can say that if you live
one end in a split-off way, then one end cannot communicate with the
other. Put quite simply, you have the experience but it is not
meaningful, and an experience which one does not feel meaningful is
155

Marie-Louise von Franz

nothing. It only becomes real when it is connected with an emotional
perception of meaning. Without that one is just bored. I knew of one
man who, with his shadow, had a lot of affairs, but was so much not in
it that in the middle of the sex act he would look at his watch to see
how much time he had! Obviously it meant nothing to him, or else it
was purely narcissistic, for all he experienced was his role as a male.
Question: And what would be wrong with the woman who would go into a
relationship with such a man?
She generally makes the same “cut” with the animus. For example,
in the case of that prostitute, her idea was that if she tried to earn her
living by typing in an office, she would have to be at the office at 9 a.m.
and still work till 6 in the evening for weeks and weeks on end and
would never be able to do anything else. As she was very
undisciplined and quite childish, that was unacceptable to her. Her
animus said that that would go on forever, which was animus opinion
number one, for she could just as well have started an office job and
found a boyfriend all the same. But her animus logic was that if she
worked an office job she woud have to submit to discipline—which
she hated—and never have a love affair. Why one excluded the other
one does not know, but her animus thought so, and then at fifty she
would be an ugly old woman still typing in an office! She wanted to
live and did not want an office life, but she needed money for food and
could not afford to live freely with a lot of men whom she may have
chosen, so the animus said that she should combine the two thing and
to hell with her moral prejudices. One could say that in her case she
just resigned herself to it because she had no faith in the irrational. She
landed in New York as an immigrant, and when she saw the immense
city she felt she would be lost in it. She had no faith in herself or in life,
not in her own personality and not in God. So she mapped it all out
and thought that being a prostitute was the thing to do. In the case of a
woman, it is the animus who engineers things, and he is always a
professional pessimist who excludes the tertium quod non datur.14 The
animus says to the woman that he knows there are only so many
possibilites; he says the thing can only go in such a way, thereby
blocking off any possibility of life producing something itself.
Question: Do you mean that a woman who had a good relation to her
instincts would not fall for such a man?
14

See “The Psychology of the Child Archetype,” The Archetypes and the
Collective Unconscious, CW 9i, esp. pars. 285ff.
156

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

Yes, I think that is correct, or she might start a relationship on this
unreal level, but then she would try to pull the man into a definite or
meaningful relationship. I can give you an illustration, though it does
not quite fit because in this case the man took the initiative. It is the
case of a woman who had rather too many affairs which she ran in
accordance with her animus decisions. But then she met a man who
really loved her and whose instincts were more sound than had been
the case with the others. He was very sensitive and felt that very often
she want to bed with him without being there herself or in feeling-tune
with him. He felt the autonomy of her sexuality and revolted against it.
He got nasty with her because it hurt him. He said that was how she
was with her other lovers—of whom he was jealous, feeling himself to
be just one of them. He knew nothing about psychology so he was
rather clumsy and nasty, calling her a “cheap” woman, and such
things, which was not just, for she was not that at all, only her feeling
had been cut off. But though his strong, emotional, instinctual
reactions, and the fact that he was a mature man who had had much
experience and had great physical self-control, he was able to get her
feeling back—naturally a very difficult task. Usually the man is
sexually so impulsive that he cannot hold himself back, but this man
said that he would not go on unless they were on a feeling level. She
had a dream that there was a dirty, poisonous muddy hole in the
ground into which he dived and brought up a golden key to her. I
think we can say that he really rescued her feeling because he loved
her as an individual and did not just make use of her. He wanted her
as a whole person with her feeling, and resented it when that did not
function. Through his resentment and after a lot of quarreling and
trouble he brought up her feeling personality.
One can naturally go on discussing and expanding this problem
endlessly because it is really the key to the whole dream. In my lecture
on evil, I gave a motif from a Russian fairy tale which illustrates this. In
the story the Czar says, at a dinner party, that none of his sons had yet
picked his flowers, so the three sons ask for his blessing and set out on
the search. Each takes a horse from the stable and sets forth and all
three come to a signpost which says: “He who goes to the right will
have enough to eat, but his horse will be hungry; he who goes to the
left will have enough for his horse but will himself remain hungry; and
the one who goes straight ahead will die.” The first brother would be
robbed of the instinctual experience and therefore his horse would be
hungry. The brother who goes that way finds a copper snake on a
157

Marie-Louise von Franz

mountain. When he brings it home his father is furious and says he
had brought back something dangerous and demonic and puts him in
prison; that is, he only finds a kind of petrified life and falls back into
the prison of the traditional spirit, that is, the father. The next brother
goes to the left and finds a whore who has a mechanical bed to which
she invites him. Jumping out of it herself, she presses a button and the
bed turns over and he falls into a cellar where there are a lot of other
men—all waiting in the dark. That’s the fate of the one who goes to the
left!
Then comes the Great Ivan, the hero of Russian fairy tales. When he
gets to the signpost he begins to cry and says that the poor fellow who
has to go to death will neither find honor nor glory, but he gives his
horse the whip and goes ahead. Then his horse dies and comes to life
again, and he finds the witch and conquers her and then finds the
princess and comes back and becomes the Czar, etc. He has a normal,
successful fairy tale career. He chooses to remain in the conflict, which
seems death to the ego, for ego-consciousness wants to know what is
ahead. If this woman who arrived in New York had had the strength
and the psychological courage to accept the fact that she faced nothing
but misery whatever she did and that she could not see a glimmer of
light or life ahead, if she could have faced moral death and still have
remained herself, then the fairy tale, the path of individuation, would
have begun. But she couldn’t, and in her case she chose the path to the
left. Others choose the path to the right.
It can therefore be said that human consciousness must always be
crucified between the pull of the two poles: if you fall too much into
either one, you die. Life in its essence, means crucifixion. To the
rational ego it seems to be death, and that is what this Russian motif
expresses in a most beautiful and clear form. The third son chose what
seemed to his ego to be the road to death, but in fact, as the story says,
he chose the road of life. The others, who wanted to be clever and
chose the relatively lesser evil—one the way on the right and the other
that on the left—had not the nervous strength or the guts to face the
unknown and so rationalized the situation. Apparently for a human
being to face the unknown—not to know in advance what is coming
and yet to be able to keep steady in the dark—is the most difficult
thing. Man’s most ancient fear and cause of panic seems always to
have been the unknown. The first time the primitive sees an airplane
or a car, he runs away, for everything unknown is inevitably terrible!
That is the old pattern and it is the same thing in analysis. When
158

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

people are confronted with a situation where they cannot, by their own
inner reason, see what is coming, they panic. That is painful, but it
would not matter so much, if then they did not rashly come to some
decision because they have not been able to stand the tension of not
knowing what is ahead
If the puer goes too much to the right or the left, that would not be so
bad because sometimes one must first find that copper snake and then
land in the whore’s cellar and only afterward make up one’s mind that
it would be better to go on the road that leads to death. But in reality
the puer does something much worse: he risks neither way but
ventures a little both ways, so as to be on the safe side. He bets on one
horse and puts a little on the other too, and that is his self-destructive
act. That is worse than going too much either way, for that he gets
punished and one has to wake up and pull out. The natural interplay
of psychological opposites corrects the one-sided business. Life forces
one into the middle path. But in order to avoid suffering the puer plays
a dirty trick which boomerangs back onto him. He splits himself by
throwing a sop to the dragon, but remains on the other side inwardly.
He has illusions about himself, and so he arrests the process of life and
gets stuck, for even the interplay of the opposites is thwarted. That is
what his weak personality tricks him into in order that he may escape
suffering.
As the match-making witch that the young man considered me to
be, I had tried to push him into taking up a relationship with a woman
whom he already had his Don Juan affair with and cast aside. But
when, after he had planned and written his letter saying that he
wanted to see her again, this synchronistic event took place: she wrote
a letter similar to his own, which he had not mailed. Then, for the first
time, with this woman he got a whiff of meaningfulness. After this
strange event he couldn’t avoid naively thinking that this woman must
stand for something beyond what had already passed between them,
and that the relationship must have some meaning. Thus, for the first
time, he accepted something unknown. The doubt which I cast into his
mind would not have helped except for the synchronistic event, but as
it was, his attitude toward life was touched by an experience which
seemed marvelous and mysterious. He therefore went on the bicycle
ride with the girl with a different attitude instead of knowing all about
everything. For the first time he was puzzled about a relationship, and
when he slept in her arms, you see what the unconscious produced. It
was as though the heavens below—the meaningfulness of such sexual
159

Marie-Louise von Franz

experience—dawned on him, which explains why, while making the
motions of riding a bicycle, he fell slowly into the heavens below.
The next theme in the dream is the explosion of light in the heavens
below, which would mean a sudden realization and an illumination
from below. It is a very interesting motif if you compare it with the
experience of the medieval mystics who spoke of light which they
experienced from above. Here it is the light experienced from below,
which comes from accepting the unknown of life and the unknown
unconscious. We might say with the alchemists, “Heaven above,
Heaven below.” It is the same light but comes from the midnight sun
and not the sun above. When Apeleius was initiated into the Isis
mysteries, he described how he was illuminated not by the heavenly
sun but by the midnight sun, which he met face to face when he
descended into the underworld. That would mean an experience
which cannot be reached by intellectual effort, or exercises in
concentration, or Yoga, or the Exercitia Spiritualia, but rather an
experience of the Self, which one can only have by accepting the
unconscious and the unknown in life and the difficulty of living one’s
own conflict.
When the dreamer gets further down, suddenly the heavens below
solidify and look like the earth as seen from an airplane, with a
quadrangular pattern of fields. It is a very positive image, for now the
split is beginning to close. There is still a difference of levels, however,
for between the earth above and the earth below there is a very sudden
change of level such as often appears in the psychological geography
of a dream where there are two levels and no connecting steps. Such a
dreamer might switch in his way of living between intellect and
instinct, without any bridge between, but that would not show a very
dangerous situation since it is one that occurs frequently in the case of
young people who have not yet harmonized the relationship between
the two. The wound in this dreamer’s psyche is healing; the earth level
is rising. He realizes that by accepting, for once, an unknown situation
and venturing into it, he is for the first time touching human reality,
the earth upon which we live. How would you interpret this? He could
have seen woods below, or just the ground, but he sees the fields.
Answer: Man in relation to the earth.
Yes, it is cultivated earth on which labor has been expended and
which has been distributed among different individuals, with the
disadvantage, also, of the many walls, fences and roads, and all the
different regulations and controls concerning admittance and respect
160

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

of property. It is the civilized earth and suggests work, so that one is
reminded of Jung’s words that work is part of the cure of the split and
difficulties of the puer aeternus type, “It does not matter what job you
take. The point is that for once you do something thoroughly and
conscientiously, whatever it is.” This man insisted that if only he could
find the right thing, then he would work, but that he could not find it.
Jung’s answer was, “Never mind, just take the next bit of earth you can
find. Plow it and plant something in it. No matter whether it is
business, or teaching, or anything else, give yourself for once that field
which is ahead of you.”
Everybody has a field of reality to work in if he wants to. The
childish trick of saying, “I would work if it was the right thing,” is one
of the many self-delusions of the puer aeternus by which he stays within
the mother realm and his megalomanic identification with the gods—
who as you know do not work. Except for Hephaestus, who was
despised by all the others, there are no working gods in Greek
Mythology. Fields would also imply limitation. That is the drawback of
getting in touch with reality, because in that way one becomes limited,
there are restrictions. One comes to the miserable human situation
where one’s hands are tied and it is not possible to do as one would
like, something particularly disagreeable to the puer aeternus. In your
work you come up against your own limitations, both intellectual and
physical, for what one produces is always miserable compared with
the fantasies one had lying in bed about what one would do, if one
could! The fantasy is far more beautiful than the real product!
Next in the dream comes an autonomous switch, for the valley is
suddenly replaced by stagnant, icy water. The dreamer thinks that this
is the mother complex, into which he does not want to fall. It is
treacherous, and what before resembled an explosion of light now
resembles a soap bubble with a skull in it. The same world into which
he is sinking now shows its completely destructive aspect, without
anything happening in the dream to justify such a change. If in a
dream the dreamer does or thinks something, after which the whole
landscape turns negative, you can say that there was a wrong thought
that caused this. If while sinking the dreamer had the thought that he
did not like this narrow reality and then the change had come about,
then the dream would be easy to interpret, for if one refuses the earth,
then it becomes an eternal stagnation and being haunted by the mother
complex and, at the end, death. That would be a cheap and easy way
of interpreting the dream, but here the thing is very mysterious, for he
161

Marie-Louise von Franz

goes on—one would think rightly—toward the bottom of the valley
and the earth and, quite of itself, what had looked so positive turns
into something uncanny—stagnant ice water and a soap bubble with a
skull in it. I do not pretend to have understood this in all its aspects; I
intend just to tell you what I think about it.
Let us begin with the stagnant ice water. That suggests stagnation in
reality, where the water of life does not flow. Ice suggests being frozen
in the cold. Obviously this man was very cold. If he were not, he could
have not behaved as he did with his girlfriend. His feeling was either
nonexistent or else had been destroyed by the family situation or else
he was so much tied to the mother that he had no feeling for other
people. As you remember, I had met him only once, so I could not say
where his feeling was— whether it was tied up with the mother or
whether he was just an unfeeling cold fish, but certainly in his
behavior he was cold. He associated the world below with the mother
complex, into which he does not want to fall. There, I think we get on
the track of trouble. A soap bubble, in general, is a simile for an
illusion, which can be pricked. It has great volume and a marvelous,
beautiful surface if the sun shines on it, but it is an empty sphere
which, when it comes into contact with some real body, dissolves into
nothingness. So the soap bubble usually stands for illusions. It is
possible that little children who love to bubble with their spittle that
that is accompanied by joyful fantasy. Building castles in the air, or in
Spain, fantasizing, is like the inner cinema where you are the powerful
stag or the beautiful woman. All those wonderful daydreams are
bubbles which can be pricked. Here something appears below which
means stagnation, coldness, illusion, and death, and all that without
apparently any fault on the part of the dreamer except that when he
sees the, stagnant, icy water, he says that is the mother complex, which
he is not going to fall into. I think that gives us the key. We must not
forget that this man had a Freudian analysis. What effect does that
have on a human being? It produces an intellectual attitude toward
life, robs it of its mystery: one knows all about it, and if one does not,
then the doctor in the white coat who sits behind your couch does.
Freudian analysis explains everything to you as the Oedipus complex,
and so on, and dreams are no mystery; they are quite clear! All long
objects are phallic, and the others are feminine, and the rest have some
sexual connotation. If you know just a little anatomy you know all
about it; you only have to make the connection. So dream
interpretation becomes very monotonous and easy. Freud even once
162

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

complained to Jung that he no longer worked much on dreams
because it was too monotonous! Of course! He knew what would come
out, so he played the magician’s trick and first dropped a rabbit into
the hat and then pulled it out! That is Freudian dream interpretation:
one knows what it is driving at, namely, the Oedipus situation, which
you first put it in the hat and then triumphantly pull out again. It is an
intellectual trick, always the same thing, and you get into a rut of
monotony. Your mind is no longer open to the fact that something
might exist which you do not yet know, or that you might dream about
something which is not yet known to you. The ego is therefore fed
with conscious illusions, namely, that it is just a question of knowing
all about it, and with that comes the complete stagnation of life.
There is a certain type of man with a mother complex who is much
attracted to Freudian psychology because its effect on the individual is
similar to that of the mother complex itself; that is, it is another prison,
and this time you are imprisoned in a situation which is known to your
own intellect. The Freudian system has it gaps, but these were not
approved by its founder, who created the system as something entirely
known, except for the physical aspect where there are openings left for
biological chemistry. On the religious or philosophical side there are no
openings. There everything is precisely defined, and for this reason
Freudian analysis seems attractive to the victim of a severe mother
complex, with his anxious and ungenerous attitude, because it offers
him another cage of protection. One learns the language easily, and one
who has had a Freudian analysis for six months or so knows all about
it. If you have a patient who has had it, he will bring his dream to you
with a cheap, ready-made interpretation. You feel puzzled by the
dream and wonder what it means, but he will interrupt you and ask if
it is not again the Oedipus situation. Such people have it all pat, and
therefore life cannot flow. Freudian analysis is completely unfeeling,
and this is also expressed factually in as much as the doctor is not
allowed to have any personal feeling for his patients and avoids them
by putting on his white coat and sitting behind the client; and personal
feeling or feeling-reaction is suspect.15 If the patient's feeling function
is already damaged, the split will be worsened.
Our dreamer, like a clever monkey, had assimilated the Freudian
standpoint as a justification for his Don Juanism. I am not accusing his
15

Here, I am speaking strictly of Freudian school; there are modified schools
but I am referring to the original attitude.
163

Marie-Louise von Franz

Freudian analyst of that; I think that at least was his own trick. I do not
know. But every time he felt rather too close to a girl, he thought that
was the mother complex again, so he got out. In this way the Freudian
way of thinking has helped him carry on his Don Juanism. What is so
damnable about it is that there is even truth in it! Naturally, in Don
Juanism, the partner who is looked for in different women (Goethe
formulated it aptly as “Seeing Helen in every woman”) is the mother
complex, so that to have an affair and then walk out of it because it is
again the mother complex is quite justifiable. It is a wonderful excuse
for escape! And it is quite true that these first fascinations are due to
the mother complex; that is, to the play of the anima, and they do
prove to be an illusion. I have not for a long time seen a man who has
got into touch with a woman, with feeling, who has not suffered from
certain disillusionments and disappointments and who, in the end, has
not realized the transience and the corruptibility of all earthly life.
I would therefore propose to take this dream more philosophically.
If you venture into life, into reality, instead of keeping outside so as to
avoid suffering, you will find that earth and women are like fertile
field on which you can work and that life is also death; that if you give
yourself to reality, you will be disillusioned at the end of it will be that
you will meet death.16 If you accept your life, you really, in the deepest
sense of the word, accept death, and that is what the puer does not
want. He does not want to accept mortality, and that is why he does
not want to go into reality, because the end of it is the realization of his
weakness and of his mortality. He identifies with the immortal and
does not accept the mortal twin, but by going into life he would
assimilate the mortal brother. Therefore you could say that this dream
contains something, a kind of philosophy of life which would not
surprise an Easterner. No Indian would be surprised by it. He would
say: “Certainly, if you go into life, if you love a woman, then you
embrace an illusion, and every illusion will show itself as Maya, as the
great illusion of the world, the end of which is death.”
All those who have read some Eastern mythology and philosophy
will not be surprised by this, but it is surprising that in a modern
European young man’s dream such a deep philosophy is brought up.
The thought is put plainly before him: life and meeting a woman mean
coming together with reality; to work means to meet the earth—

16

I heard since that the dreamer died in the middle of life.
164

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

disillusion, stagnation and death. That is an honest answer to one who
has doubts about whether he should live or not. We should not forget
that due to his father’s suicide this young man, as a child, had met
death in a very shocking way. The father shot himself when the boy
was six, and living in a small town the child doubtless heard gossip. It
seems probable that he peeped into the coffin and saw the remains of
his father, and if he did not hear outside talk, likely that maid in the
kitchen made comments. He had met death in a shocking form as a
sensitive boy, so death already belonged to his experience. This we
should remember, for probably it partly accounts for his hesitation
about going into life. The unconscious does not pour any balm over
the facts at this moment, or comfort him about them, but presents him
with the plain truth: life is death, and if you accept life and move into
it, as you are trying to do with this girl, you are moving toward your
own death. Death is the goal of life.
From a therapeutic standpoint this fascinated me because the
tendency of analysts is to look at one part of the analysand’s life and
endeavor to infect the other with a certain amount of optimism;
namely, that one ought to go into life, one should believe in its
meaningfulness, and so on. But see what the unconscious does here! It
shocks the dreamer with the absolute dual aspect of this reality. If he
wants to say yes, he should have no illusions about that, for this is how
it is. Now he can say yes or no on an honest basis. And if he prefers to
kill himself, that can be his honest solution too.
Then later on, the dreamer left the girl again, in spite of all that
happened, and, in a big town, fell into the hands of a Russian
prostitute whose chief customer were Negroes. These Negroes hated
the young man because he was the only white lover and made several
attempts to kill him. The Russian prostitute was the Mother Earth
aspect of his mother complex—which the girl in whose arms he had
dreamt was not, for she was a sensitive, introverted girl and not a very
earthy person. With the Russian, he did fall into the stagnant water of
his mother complex and did nearly meet death. His mother complex
made him desert his relationship with the girl—which would have
been difficult but human—and then made him fall into the complex
itself.

165

Lecture 8

We stopped in the middle of the dream which the man had when lying
on the girl’s lap, in which he was slowly falling into the big split of the
earth. You will remember that he first saw the stars in the heavens
below, then an explosion of light, afterwards fields, as one sees them
from an airplane, and then a gray and dirty stagnant pool of water
which was like ice but did not reflect. He then half wakes and says to
himself that he is not afraid but that water is a symbol of the mother,
into which he does not want to fall. Then, at the bottom of a valley, a
round spot of light again appears, the borders which are a bit blurred.
This explodes like a soap bubble. In this spot of light he sees a skull
and thinks that this is strange, for what has death to do with all this?
He repeats that he is not terribly afraid but continues to slowly fall in
the same place. Then, the dream says, the whole thing disappears and
is replaced by a yellow linoleum floor with brown spots. The
landscape has completely lost its gigantic proportions, and the
dreamer wonders why there is linoleum at the bottom of the valley
and says that it is really surrealistic. It is all very clear and he can see it
quite plainly. He laughs a little about the linoleum, and in the letter he
sent accompanying the dream he added: “I don’t like linoleum. It is
always cold and not aesthetic. I don’t like it.” He obviously has a
strong feeling against it.
We have discussed the problem of the skull and said that, in a way,
the dreamer is right in saying that falling into this water would be
falling into the valley, where there is the skull; he would be falling into
his own mortality and the stagnating aspect of matter. I mentioned last
time that he did actually leave the girl in whose company he had this
dream, and afterward had an affair with a Russian prostitute who had
166

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

a number of Negro lovers who several times tried to kill him. So one
could say that he really did fall into this dirty pool and really risked
death and complete stagnation. The Russian prostitute was a fat,
earthy woman, obviously a mother figure, so in spite of his not
wanting to fall into this condition—according to the dream—he did
afterward go through this phase and, so to speak, lost his wings
completely. He already had the fear that this woman would land him
there when he made his contact with the girl, which was why he feared
to continue the relationship. It was for this reason that he always left
women so quickly, feeling that behind every woman there was a
whirlpool of matter which sucked one down. Falling into death does
not always take such a concrete form, although it does happen and
many pueri die between thirty and forty-five for this very reason. But
there is another way of falling into something like this.
After the puer loses the ecstatic, romantic élan of youth, there is
danger of an enantiodromia into a completely cynical attitude toward
women, life, work in general, and money. Many men suddenly fall into
an attitude of disappointed cynicism. They lose all their ideals and
romantic impulses and also, naturally, their creativeness, writing it all
off as the fantasies of youth. They then become petty, earth-bound,
small-minded people who just want to have a family, money and a
career. Everything else is regarded as romantic nonsense—what one
wanted and did when one was young, which now must be written off.
It is as though Icarus had fallen into the mud and life had stopped.
This is due to a weak consciousness, which cannot conceive of the
possibility of enduring the difficulties of reality and not sacrificing
one’s ideals but instead testing them against the touchstone of reality.
Such men take the easy way and say that ideals merely complicate life
and must therefore be written off. This is a great danger.
This dream, as you know, was very weak on the feeling side, and the
cold ice at the bottom of the valley mirrors his own basically cold
attitude and lack of feeling. It is the feeling function that gives life its
color and values. In this case there had surely been a great shock to the
boy’s feeling when his father committed suicide, and life then became
icy and stagnant. If you talk to such people, they say that there is
always the same human dirt and that from now on they will just get
up in the morning and have breakfast…and just continue to exist.
I told you last time of a man who had fallen into this state and then
dreamed of a prince whom he had to follow. There the puer aeternus
reappeared and wanted to be followed, but as a figure separate from
167

Marie-Louise von Franz

the ego. After having been identical with the prince, the man fell into
the mud of the road, after which they became two. Then the prince
reappeared, still in love with his bride to whom he gave a jewel like a
tear, and the man had to follow him and the bride, but got knocked
down by shadow figures. So one could say that in order to avoid this
stagnation it is necessary to face the shadow again and again. When
you are identical with the puer aeternus archetype, then the shadow has
to be faced in order to come down to earth. But when you are
identified with the shadow, the archetype of the puer has to be faced
again in order to connect with it, for facing the other side is what leads
to the next step. I have seen several cases where this disappointment
was not so much concerned with the mind and the spiritual side but
has affected the man’s attitude to marriage.
When this kind of Icarus loses his wings and falls into the stagnating
aspect of the mother and matter, some very independent men cannot
make up their minds to marry because they feel that marriage would
be a prison, a thought which is typical of the mother complex and the
puer aeternus mentality. After having married, as Jung once said of such
a man, “He curled up in his little basket like a nice little dog and never
moved again.” They never move again; they don’t dare look at other
women, and they generally marry (even though she may be beautifully
disguised in youth) a devouring-mother type of woman. If she is not
already that, they force her into the role by being submissive and
boylike and sonlike. Then the marriage situation is changed into a kind
of warm, lazy prison of habits which they put up with with a sigh.
Such men continue on the professional side quite efficiently and
generally become very ambitious, for everything is boring at home—
there is the basket for the dog, the sexual problem is parked, as is the
food problem. All ambition and power go over into the career where
they are quite efficient, while on the eros side they stagnate
completely; nothing goes on there any more, for marriage is the final
trap in which they got caught. That is another way in which the puer
aeternus can fall into stagnating water—either on the mental side, when
he gives up any kind of differentiated feeling relationship and curls up
in the habitual conventional situation.
We also said about the skull that naturally it could be taken as
representing the problem of death. One of the problems is that if the
puer enters life, then he must face the fact of his mortality and the
corruptible world. he must accept the fact of his own death. That is a
variation of the old mythological motif where after leaving Paradise,
168

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

which is a kind of archetypal maternal womb, man falls into the
realization of his incompleteness, corruptibility and mortality. From
this skull, this realization of death, the dream says, light explodes
again, showing that in such a realization there is still more light to
come. That is, the dreamer would be illumined if he could think about
and accept these facts of life. Afterward the landscape changed
completely and loses its gigantic proportions, and now there is the
linoleum at the bottom of the valley. First the dreamer looked down
into the split and saw the stars below, then came the dark sky with the
light stars, and afterward the yellow linoleum, when what were light
stars become brown spots. Again he is looking at the same picture, but
in the color there is an enantiodromia, for what was light is now dark,
and vice versa. This, he says is really surrealistic. I have no
applications for the linoleum other than his dislike of its coldness and
unaesthetic effect, so we have to add our own material, though it may
be arbitrary to do so.
One could say that linoleum is the typical floor covering in little
bourgeois dwellings and poor people’s homes. It is cheap stuff and
brings to mind the rather disgusting atmosphere of cheap little flats
that smell of cabbage. Now, for the first time, nature no longer covers
the ground. Instead, there is an artificial man-made substance in all its
smallness. This goes with the fact that the landscape loses its gigantic
proportions and that everything is flattened; the stars have become
dark spots, and what before was the brown earth has become a
yellowish linoleum. Here again is the danger of falling into banality,
connected with the fact that floor is now artificial and man-made.
Nature always prevents stagnation, for it brings up compensatory
processes, and I illustrated last time with the case of the man who
begun to stagnate and whose unconscious then brought up the dream
about the prince. That woke him up again and showed him that life
was still exciting but that he had fallen out of its rhythm by curling up
in the banality of his marital and professional situation. So it is the loss
of nature which goes together with banality.
However, as we said last time, the picture now shows a positive
aspect, for before there was a terrific and dangerous split in the psyche,
but when earth appeared below, at least the split was lessened. Now
the man is not falling into bottomless space, which would have meant
madness (and he was in danger of going mad or committing suicide).
Now there is a floor below, although there still remains the two levels.
If the gigantic proportions disappear and there is some leveling up,
169

Marie-Louise von Franz

that means that even if he does fall into banality, the great polarities
and—for his weak personality—the too great tension in his psyche
have been flattened out and the opposites are nearer each other. The
stars, however, which are the illuminating aspect of archetypal
complexes in the collective psyche, have now been turned into dark
spots.
If you switch from this case and think so-called normal people, how
do the archetypes of the complexes appear to them? They would say
that life was quite clear except for a few disagreeable spots, the dark
spots—the complexes! Actually, when Jung discovered the complexes
of the unconscious, he did discover them as dark spots, namely, as
holes in our field of consciousness. By making the association
experiment he found out that the field of consciousness was tightly put
together, that we can associate clearly and correctly except when a
complex is touched, and then there is a hole. If a complex is touched in
the association experiment, there are no associations. That, therefore, is
the normal view of the unconscious, namely that everything is clear
except for those disagreeable dark spots of the complexes, behind
which are archetypes. That is what one always realizes if there is a
strong enantiodromia. After a psychotic episode, if people go through
what one calls the regressive restoration of the persona,17 they then can
call that which before had meant illumination to them (the source of
the too bright insight which one has fallen into the collective
unconscious), the dark spots which have to be avoided. This is a very
unhealthy state of affairs, but it frequently happens when you get
people out of their psychotic episode by pharmacological means, they
then tend simply to push away the whole experience of the collective
unconscious, with its excitement and illumination, and call that a dark
spot about which they do not want to hear any more. This is the typical
compensation in a case where the ego is too weak to stand the
opposites and see both sides of the thing, namely, that the archetypes
are the source of illumination on the one side but that one must keep
one’s feet firmy planted on this world at the same time. From this
dream it looks like the dreamer were in danger of falling into the
opposite, complete banality, but when I wrote him about the dream I
said this was a phase he had to go through, and that after he had fallen
into it he must trust the unconscious to take him to the next step; that

17

See Two Essays on Analytical Psychology, CW 7, pars. 471ff.
170

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

for the time being this is where he had to land and it is a process which
cannot be stopped; that he will fall into utter banality and write off all
his former ideals—an angel who has lost his wings.
Remark: One could at least say that on such a floor he could walk, whereas
on the sky he could not.
Yes, that is so, and he could also walk on the fields, which came first
which after came the skull, where again he could not walk, and then
the linoleum, where he could. Therefore, there are really two changes:
there is the fruitful earth, then death, and then something he can stand
upon. I think that it is a pity that the dream did not stop when the
fields appeared, for that would have been a complete solution of the
problem, but he was not capable of looking at reality as something
which one could form and work upon; his nature was too passive. He
needed something on which to stand, but he could not turn to the
masculine attitude toward reality and say that if things were not as he
liked, he would change them and impress his own mind upon them.
The creative masculine gesture of taking the clay and molding it
according to his own ideas was what he could not do. He reamins
passive and accepts reality, but then it has to be something on which he
can stand. However, that is better than before, when he would have
fallen into a bottomless abyss. He now has ground under his feet. But
from this dream I would say that he has not yet found his masculinity,
but is still dependent upon the mother-base and the form it takes. How
much it is still a problem of not having found his masculinity is shown
in the next dream.
Question: Could the yellow floor mean intuition?
To an intuitive person reality is always what creates difficulties and
what one knocks up against in life. The yellow color would have to do
with intuition, but I cannot quite fit in this floor as intuition, except
that he was clearly a very intuitive kind of person, and it might mean
that at least he had now found the basis of his main function. He was
so completely unborn that he had not even developed a superior and
inferior function. The ego complex was weak, and there was no
developed consciousness, so at least his function of intuition could
become something he could rely upon. Its opposite would be reality
(which is related to through the sensation function), and intuition is
always at odds with reality. To the intuitive type, earthly reality is the
great cross.
Question: Could you say that one aspect has to be lived in order to get to
the other? It seems to me that if he has got his linoleum to stand upon he
171

Marie-Louise von Franz

might find the stars too, since one replaces the other, and the colors replace
each other.
Yes, I would say that the first step of his birth of consciousness is
that he begins to develop a superior function and that later, after many,
many years, then he might touch the other. Practically, it would mean
that with a human being in such an unborn state one would have to
concentrate not on getting close to their inferior function but on first
developing their main function, which normally takes place between
the ages of ten and twenty. He still has to get to that, that is, to develop
one main function, after which he could go on to the inferior function,
namely, the problem of what is behind the irritating factors of reality.
In the next dream which he wrote me he says that he is in sort of a
razzia (that is, a raid, or round-up, in which people are caught by the
police). He does not try to run away because he thinks that his
innocence will be revealed. He is put in a room, and after a while he
opens the door and sees that his guard is a woman. He asks her if she
will let him go since he is innocent, and she answers, “Yes, certainly I
shall let you go because you are innocent, but first there are some
questions to be put to you.” Then behind the wall he hears moaning
and realizes that the question is accompanied by torture. Actually,
people are being beaten on the sinus. He is very much afraid of the
physical pain and wakes up.
He did not give me any other associations, but this clearly refers to
his prison-and-police phobia-complex. You remember he could not
cross the Swiss border becase he thought that he would be put in
prison, and he always ran when he saw a policeman. In connection
with the woman guard, you will remember that he was a painter and
had once painted the portrait of an unknown woman, and imaginary
woman, as he wrote to me. For four years he worked on this painting,
which became so vivid and significant for him that he had to keep it
covered with a cloth, especially at night because he was aways afraid it
might come alive and threaten him. He could not sleep with it in the
same room for that reason, so he painted and then quickly covered it
over, and sometimes for weeks did not look at it because to him it was
a living thing. That is a really amazing example of what the anima is.
The painting itself did not really remind him of any concrete woman. It
was the representation of the anima, the imago of the woman within,
and it had become so alive to him that he was terrified of it. The old
Pygmalion motif!
Now we should go into this strange police-prison complex, which
172

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

he had as a kind of phobia in reality. The dream is very important
because it begins to link up with what I wish to arrive at at the end of
my lecture, namely, that we are dealing with a problem that is not only
personal but belongs to our time: the police-state, the absolutist
system, which tortures thousands of people, is becoming more and
more the great problem of our day. The strange thing is that it is
mainly the pueri aeterni who are the torturers and establish tyrannical
and murderous police systems. So the puer and the police-state have a
secret connection with each other; the one constellates the other.
Nazism and Communism have been created by men of this type. The
real tyrant and the real organizer of torture and of suppression of the
individual are therefore revealed as originating in the not worked out
mother complex of such men. That is what possesses them, and it is
out of the state of possession into which such a complex plunges
people that they act in this outrageous manner.
Since the dreamer is in the street, it can be said that he is in the
collective. At present, in reality, he has no relationship to the collective
since he is an isolated lonely human being with an entirely asocial
attitude. He is nowhere linked up with his feelings and has no real
friends—only the man to whom he gave away his girl, but that had not
been a strong feeling connection. Therefore he is lost in the collective.
He is the anonymous man in the street, and there is where he is caught
by the police system. Anyone who has a weak personality and who has
not worked on his individuality is threatened from both sides, not only
with being swept away by the collective consciousness (outer
collectivity). The person with a weak ego-complex swims between
Scylla and Charybdis—between the devil and the deep blue sea—
either collective unconscious or conventionality in some form
(collective movements very likely), one or the other catches him.
Identifying with the persona or identifying with a collective movement
is therefore as much a symptom of a weak personality as to go mad
and fall into the collective unconscious. It is merely a variation of the
same thing, which is why the carrier of these collective, absolutist
movements are generally very weak as far as the ego is concerned.
I remember a medical doctor telling me that at the beginning of the
last war, when he was a stomach specialist and very well known, it
happened that he had a patient with stomach ulcers who was a high
Nazi official. He succeeded in curing this man, and as result he was
spoken of in Nazi circles as being a good stomach doctor. So
throughout the war an enormous number of high-up Nazi officials
173

Marie-Louise von Franz

came to him for private treatment, and under the religio medici (the
medical code) he of course could not refuse to accept them as patients.
He said that it was amazing to see these concentration-camp torturers,
those so-called heroes, take off the beautiful shirt and disclose a body
tanned by sun and sport—and then to find a nervous, hysterical
stomach trouble underneath. These pseudo-heroes were merely
weaklings—spoiled Mamma’s boys. A large percentage he had to
dismiss, telling them the trouble was purely psychological, sheer
hysteria. To the doctor it was an eye-opener—not what he expected,
although to us it makes sense. If he told them of a cure or a regimen
which was the least bit disagreeable, they would not try it. Moreever, if
he poked into their troubles, many of them would begin to cry. He said
that, when the beautiful hero-persona had fallen off, he felt as if he
were confronted with an hysterical woman. If you look at the faces of
the “heroes” who are again drawing the swastika everywhere, you see
this same type. Our dreamer thinks he can get away because he is
innocent, so he still has the old-fashioned idea of a regular juridical
State, such as we have in Switzerland, where one could only be
arrested if one has committed some crime. One need not fear the
police, for if one has done nothing wrong one can get away. It is quite
clear from the end of the dream that the question of right or wrong
plays no role here. He will get away, but all the same he will get
tortured by the police, so his endeavor to plead the police is not going
to help him. How would you interpret his idea of being innocent? If
you remember what I told you about him, about this beautiful, delicate
blond young being with the heavenly blue coat, and if you ask what
wrong he has done in his life, you could say that he has done
practically none, except that he has not done anything! He has sinned
by not sinning. He has not lived. If you live you are forced to sin: if you
eat, then others cannot have that food. We shut our eyes to the fact that
thousands of animals are butchered so that we may live. To live is to
commit murder, and the more intensely I live the more I do wrong.
Life is connected with guilt, and he, by not living, has not
accumulated much active guilt, but he has accumulated a tremendous
amount of passive guilt. Think of all the girls he had just walked out
on. True, he has not shouted at them or given them illegitimate babies.
He has not done all those things that a more virile man might perhaps
have done, but he just let women down by disappearing, which is
cruel and immoral as to do something which is called wrong. He has
committed the sin of not living. He is typical of the kind of man who,
174

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

on account of his mother complex, a too aesthetic and high-up attitude
toward life, who thinks that by staying above it all he can keep up an
illusion of purity and innocence. He does not realize that he is secretly
accumulating dirt, so this dream tells him quite clearly that he will not
get away with that illusion. Life will catch up with him. He cannot
continue as Mamma’s innocent little boy who has never done anything
wrong, even if he would like to do so, for it wants to catch him all the
same. Therefore he is caught by collective forces in negative form. You
could say that the police represent his masculinity; because he does not
live it himself, it is lived against him. Whatever one has within oneself
but does not live grows against one, and so the dreamer is now
pursued by these torturers and the police and discovers that the real
devil is the anima figure whom he had painted for so long. She is the
torturer behind the scenes. This anima is obviously a variation of his
mother imago. It is not the anima yet, sensu stricitori; it is the anima,
but the anima identical with the image of the mother, so the mother
image is the devil behind the scenes. Do you know any mythological
variations of the mother imago and her torturing questions?
Answer: The Sphinx.
Yes, naturally, that is the great mother image who asks torturing
questions of those who want to remain innocent, and Oedipus too
wanted to be innocent; he ran away from home in order to avoid
fulfilling the prophecy that he would kill his father and marry his
mother, and by running away from it, by trying to avoid the guilt, he
ran into it. In the dream we have a modern version of the Oedipus
motif: this man too thinks he can run away from fate, and he too falls
into the grip of the Sphinx, who asks him an unanswerable question.
The motif of the Sphinx who propounds the riddle—or here, the
sphinx-like woman who asks him questions while he is being beaten
on the sinus—leads to an essential problem which is widespread and
archetypal, and which I think has not yet been sufficiently addressed.
It has to do with what I call pseudo-philosophy, the wrong kind of
intellectualism induced by the mother complex. The best example of
this is to be found in the Russian Fairy tale, “The Virgin Czar,” which I
spoke about in my last lecture. The story is about the Czar’s three sons
who go out at his behest. As you remember, the two older brothers
take the left and right ways, the one who goes to the left being caught
by a prostitute and the other caught, finally, by his own father (one
falls into the imprisonment of the sexual drive, whereas the other
regresses into tradition).
175

Marie-Louise von Franz

The hero, as you recall, despite having been warned that he would
be going to his death, goes straight ahead. His horse goes through a
death and resurrection process, but the hero stays alive. Then he comes
to the great witch, the Baba Yaga, who is combing silk and who
watches the geese in the field with her eyes, scratches the ashes in the
stove with her nose, and lives in a little rotating hut on chickens’ feet
with a cock’s comb on top. He first says a magic verse to stop the hut,
which he then enters and finds the big old witch scratching the ashes
in the stove. She turns around and says, “My child, are you going
voluntarily, or involuntarily?” What she means is, are you going on
this quest of your own free will? Since the boys had been challenged
by their father at the dinner party, when the father said that none of his
boys had yet done as much as he had, in a way they did start
involuntarily. The impulse came from the traditional past and was
handed on to the future. On the other hand, it is voluntary, particularly
in the case of the youngest, who has been laughed at as someone who
must not go because he will never get anywhere and should stay at
home by the stove. So although one can say that he really did go
voluntarily, there is something wrong with the question. First,
however, I should give you the answer because that shows how the
problem should be dealt with. Ivan answers, “You should not ask a
hero such questions, old witch. I am hungry and want my dinner, so
you hurry up!” And he ends up with some threats—very vulgar and
very delightful! He knows quite well, you see, that the witch does not
want an answer and that the question is a trick designed to lame him.
If he were to answer the question it would mean slipping on a bananaskin. It is just a diversion—not something that should be discussed.
The question of free will is one of the philosophical problems which
has never yet been solved. Free will is a subjective feeling.
Intellectually and philosophically, there is a pro and a con, and you can
never prove either side. If you ask yourself whether you are doing
something because you have to or because you want to, you will never
find out. You can always say that you feel as though you wanted it, but
perhaps it is only an unconscious complex which makes you feel like
that. So how can you ever say which it is? It is a subjective feeling, but
it is tremendously important for the ego to feel free to a certain extent.
It is a feeling problem about the mood in which one finds oneself. If
you cannot believe in a certain amount of free will and therefore free
initiative of the ego, you are completely lamed because then you have
to go into all your motives. You can go into the past and look into the
176

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

unconscious more and more deeply, but you will never get out of it.
And that is the spider’s trick of the mother complex. That is how she
tries to catch the hero. She wants him to sit and ask himself whether he
really wanted it or not; whether it is really a question of opposing his
father?—if he does this, is he really just falling for his father’s
suggestion, or is he simply showing off? You can be sure that he will sit
there forever and the witch will have him in her pocket. That is the
great mother-complex trick.
Some pueri aeterni escape from the mother by means of actual
airplanes; they fly away from mother-earth and from reality. Many
others do the same thing in “thought airplanes”—going off into the air
with some kind of philosophical theory of intellectual system. I have
not given much though to it, but it has struck me that especially among
the Latins the mother complex is combined with a strange kind of
strong but sterile intellectualism, a tendency to discuss heaven and
earth and God-knows-what in a kind of sharp intellectual way and
with complete uncreativeness. It is probably a last attempt on the part
of the men to save their masculinity. That simply means that certain
young men who are overpowered by their mother escape into the
realm of the intellect because there the mother, especially if she is the
earth type and a stupid animus kind of woman, is not up to it. They
can slip out from under her skirts into the realm of the intellect, where
she cannot follow. Therefore, since it is an initial attempt to escape the
mother’s power and the animus pressure by getting into the realm of
books and philosophical discussion, which they can think mother does
not understand, it is not altogether destructive. Such a man has then a
little world of his own—he discusses things with other men and can
have the agreeable feeling that it is something which women do not
understand. In this way he gets away from the feminine, but he loses
and leaves his earthly masculinity in the mother’s grip. He saves his
mental masculinity but sacrifices his phallus—his earthly masculinity
and his creativity. The vitality of action, that masculinity which molds
the clay, which seizes and molds reality, he leaves behind, for that is
too difficult; he escapes into the realm of philosophy. Such people
prefer philosophy, pedagogy, metaphysics and theology, and it is a
completely unvital bloodless business. There is no real question behind
such philosophy. Such people have no genuine questions. For them it
is a kind of play with words and concepts and is entirely lacking in any
convincing quality. Once could not convince a butterfly with such
“philosophical” stuff. Nobody would listen to it.
177

Marie-Louise von Franz

The pseudo-philosophical intellectualism is ambiguous because, as I
said before, it is a way by which to make a partial escape from the
dominant grip of the mother figure, but is done only with the intellect,
and only the intellect is saved. That is really what one sees in the
tragedy of the Oedipus myth, where Oedipus commits the mistake of
entering into the question instead of saying to the Sphinx that she has
no right to put such questions and that he will knock her down if she
asks such a thing again. Instead, he gives a very good intellectual
answer. The play continues very cleverly with the Sphinx apparently
committing suicide. Oedipus pats himself on the back and steps right
into the middle of his mother complex, into destruction and tragedy,
just because he complimented himself on having got out of that
difficulty by answering the question!
To my mind, the way Freudian psychology has taken this myth and
generalized it is quite wrong, for the Oedipus myth cannot be
understood without the background of Greek civilization and what
happened to it as a whole. If you think of Socrates and and the
Platonists, you see that they discovered the realm of philosophy and
pure mind in its masculine mental operations. But when you know
what happened to plato when he tried to put his ideas into reality, then
you see that they had escaped reality and had not found philosophy
with which they could form it. It was a complete failure. They
discovered pure philosophy but not the philosophy which can be put
to the test in reality. In the same way they were the founders of basic
physical and chemical concepts, but the Egyptians and the Romans
had to change these concepts later into experimental science, for the
Greeks could not put their ideas to the test in chemical experiments.
Their science remained purely speculative, even in its most beautiful
forms, and with it came the endless split of the little Greek towns and
the tragic decay of Greek civilization. As soon as they were up against
a nation with masculine and military self-discipline—the Romans—the
Greeks were at a loss. Therefore, although they were the great
philosophical fertilizers of the Mediterranean world, they never
understood the riddle of the sphinx. They thought that the intellectual
answer was. the solution—and illusion for which they paid. The
Oedipus myth is actually the myth of this stage of cultural
development. At the same time it is the myth of all those young men
who have this same problem. That is why it is also a general myth.
The question of this Russian witch—her philosophical question at
the wrong moment—shows that this is a trick of the devouring
178

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

mother’s animus. In a man—later, when he is on his own—it is a trick
of the mother complex to put a philosophical question at just the
moment when action is needed. You often see this trick in actual life.
For instance, a young man wants to go skiing or go off somewhere
with his friends; he is filled with the élan of youth, which carries out of
the nest, eager to be with others of the same age. He and his friends are
enthusiastic about taking a boat down the Rhine to Holland. The boy
tells his mother what he plans to do. It is just youthful exuberance, but
the mother begins to worry about his being away. The boy is living and
learning about life in a natural way, if only the mother does not hang
onto him. But if she does, then she starts: “Ought you to do this? I
don’t think it’s the right thing. I don’t want to prevent you. I think it is
quite right for you to go in for sport, for instance, but I don’t think you
should go just now!” It is never right “just now.” Everything must first
be thought over—that is the favorite trick of the devouring mother’s
animus. Everything must be discussed first. On principle, says she,
there is nothing against it, but in this case it seems a bit dangerous. Do
you really want to do it? And if he is somewhat cowardly, he begins to
wonder, and then the wind has gone out of his sails and he stays at
home on Sunday while the others go off without him. Once more he
has been defeated in his masculinity, instead of responding by saying
that he doesn’t care if its right or not, he just wants to go! The moment
for action is not the time for discussion.
I feel very negative in this regard for the generations who have to
group up under parents who have had analysis—whether Freudian,
Jungian, or another kind—because I see that nowadays the mother’s
animus even uses psychology to lame the son: “I don’t know if it is
psychologically right for you to go skiing,” or whatever. In the second
generation even psychology is dangerous; the children of
unpsychological parents were often luckier. They could start
something new, but not those whose parents’ minds already spoiled by
psychology. The same thing applies also to analysts who want to keep
the patient, for the moment the analysand wants to go into action the
analyst may say that one must look first at the dreams to see if it is
right psychologically. The puer aeternus shadow often does the same
thing if no mother or analyst plays that role; every time he wants to go
into action he will argue that he should not act until he has thought it
over very carefully. One could call it neurotic philosophizing,
philosophy at the wrong moment just when action is needed. That is
the trick behind the myth of the riddle of the Sphinx and the devilish
179

Marie-Louise von Franz

question of the Baba Yaga in the fairy tale. It is the mother-anima who
says, “Oh, yes, you may go, but I must just ask a few questions!” And
whether he answers the question or not, he is tortured.
But there is also a positive aspect in the dream, for when the men are
tortured they are beaten on this sinus. In this young man’s country the
language has Latin roots and he knows what sinus means in Latin: the
curve, the bay at seaside or any kind of curve, but specifically a female
curve, namely, the bosom. Therefore, when he is beaten on the sinus he
is hit on his hidden femininity. The sinus is also a cavity where you get
infected , as doctors and other among you probably know. It is
therefore a hollow empty place, and “sinus” refers to something
which, in a hidden way, is feminine and within the head. It refers to the
fact that this kind of head activity, this pseudo-philosophy and
pseudo-intellectualism, has hidden feminine qualities. Being this kind
of a philosopher implies having hidden femininity, and although it is
the mother-devil who induces that man into this, that is where she hits
him. One sees in real life how mothers do everything they can to
castrate their sons: keeping them at home and making women of them,
afterward going about complaining that they are homosexual or that at
forty-three the son is not yet married and how happy she would be if
he would only get married; that it is so irritating to have him sitting
about at home so depressed, and how much she has to suffer because
of him; how anything would be better than to have him at home in that
awful state. But if a girl comes on the scene, then she goes off on
another track, for it is never the right girl; the girl in question will never
make him happy, she can guarantee that; that must be stopped. So the
mother plays it both ways. She castrates her son and then perpetually
hits that weakness, criticizing and complaining about it continually.
That is how it looks on the personal level, and the same thing applies
as far the archetypal complex is concerned, for the only cure can be
found where the destructive complex lies.
In this case you could look at such torture as a meaningless
neurosis-causing activity of the unconscious psyche. He was actually
terribly tortured by his symptoms at the time of the dream, for he
could not go anywhere because of his prison phobia. The symptom by
which the mother complex tortured him was at the same time a
question, and if he could understand it as such, he could have asked
what it wanted of him: what was the trouble behind it? And then he
would have found the answer. The torture has a completely double
aspect: if he understands it as a question put to him by fate, then he
180

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

can solve his problem, whereas if he only runs away from it, then it is
eternal torture imposed on him by his mother complex. The decision is
up to him. Unfortunately the dream ends: “I am very much afraid of
physical pain, and I wake up,” and this shows really that this is one of
the basic troubles.
It is the quite simple but widespread trouble of a man who has
fallen too much into the mother: he cannot endure physical pain.
Generally, that is where the mother who intends to devour her son
begins, when he is quite young, with her perpetual fussing care—
putting cream on the sore place—telling him not to go with the other
boys who are so brutal, and so on. When he comes home after having
been beaten up, she says she will speak to the other boy’s parents
about what awful things their son does, instead of telling her own boy
not to be such a coward but to hit back. So she turns him into a
physical coward, and that forms a base for all the rest, for a coward has
no foothold in life. I knew a man of fifty who would not go out with a
woman because, he said, if he went with her to a bar and a drunken
man challenged him, then he would be forced to fight, and that he
would never be able to do.
Remark: But think of Julius Caesar! He was so afraid of physical pain, but
you cannot say that he was a coward!
No, but he never gave in to his fear! To be sensitive is a different
thing. There are people who feel pain more keenly, but the question is
whether you give in to it. There is the story of a Frenchman and an
Englishman who, during the First World War, were in a trench
together. The Frenchman nervously smoked one cigarette after the
other and walked up and down, and the Englishman sat quietly and
then said mockingly to the Frenchman, “Are you afraid? Are you
nervous?” And the Frenchman said, “If you were afraid as I am, you
would have run away long ago.” It is not a question of being afraid.
There are thick-skinned people who don’t feel things, who have some
lack of sensitivity and are really not so badly hurt, while others feel
pain much more. The question is whether one has sufficient stamina to
stand it. Caesar certainly faced pain with his legions, even though he
hated and feared it. I would say that was really heroic. As the
Frenchman intimated to the Englishman, it is not heroic not to be
afraid. The Englishman was just unimaginative and therefore quiet.
Many people are tremendously courageous, simply because they are
not sensitive and cannot imagine what might happen. Highly strung,
imaginative people naturally suffer much more, but the real problem
181

Marie-Louise von Franz

of courage is whether one can stand it, or at least not lose one’s
fighting attitude, one’s feeling of self-defense and honor.
This is a very deep-rooted instinct, which exists not only in the
human male but also in the animal realm, for the male of many species
cannot lose self-esteem and honor without paying for it. It is essential
to basic masculinity, and to lose it means castration in a deep way.
Among the cichlidae—a certain breed of fish—a male cannot mate
with a bigger female. The reason is that these fish do not see very well,
and there is no great difference between the two sexes. They swim
toward each other, and the first thing the male notices is that the other
is bigger, which alarms him slightly in the case there may be a fight,
and he goes pale; then when he approaches and sees that it is a female
he cannot mate. A female meeting a bigger male may also be
frightened, but she can still mate. The result as the zoologists put it is
that, in the male, sex with with aggression can be combined, but not
sex and fear. In the female, sex and fear can be combined, but not
aggression and sex. And there you have the animus-anima problem in
a nutshell.
In other areas of nature, it has been discovered that if certain male
animals lose their self-esteem they die. There is a beautiful story by
Ernest Thompson Seton of a particularly good leader and cattle-thief in
a pack of wolves. This leading wolf was caught with much difficulty
and, being such a famous animal, was not killed but tied up and
brought home. At first it got absolutely wild, with manic eyes, but
then, all of a sudden, to his astonishment, Seton, who had the wolf on
his horse and was watching him, saw that the animal’s eyes became
quite quiet and had a faraway look, and the animal relaxed. He was
left tied up in the courtyard, as no decision had been made as to what
was to be done with him and the Government had offered a
tremendous price, but the next morning the wolf was dead for no
apparent reason. It had died of humiliation, and this is something quite
common, particularly in the case of male animals.
The same thing happens in primitive masculine societies. Statistics
were compiled during the last war to discover whether primitive or
more highly educated people stand imprisonment best, and it was
found that the more primitive the person the greater the rate of suicide
from despair. The Red Cross compiled the statistics, and I got the
information from my sister who was working with the Society.
Apparently among the most primitive people there were mass
suicides; they just ran amok. In one American camp where there were
182

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

well-treated Japanese prisoners, and enormous number committed
suicide in an outburst of despair. It is also well known that primitive
Africans cannot be imprisoned for more than three days. Bushmen, for
instance, cannot be imprisoned, for no matter how well they are
treated they just fade away. They lose hope and die for psychological
reasons.
So it can be said that it is essential for the human male to have
feelings of freedom, self-esteem and honor, and with that a certain
amount of aggressiveness and ability to defend himself. That belongs
to the vitality of the male, and if that is destroyed by the mother, then
he falls an easy prey to the mother’s animus. She punishes the son in a
humiliating way, thus robbing him of his self-esteem. Another very
wicked way by which it can be done is through mockery. I know a
mother who completely lamed her son by her witty tongue. Every time
he wanted to assert his masculinity and be enterprising, she would
make a little mocking remark which killed all his élan and made him
look ridiculous. A young man who goes off to perform his heroic deed
should not be ridiculed by the adult, but should be respected, for it
means the growth of masculinity. If boys play at being gangsters and
Indians they are funny, but one should recognize the necessity for the
assertion of self-esteem and feeling of freedom and independence. That
is essential, and stress should not be laid on what is ridiculous about it.
For that reason, in many primitive male societies where they endeavor
to keep their independence and masculinity, when the males go round
wearing animal masks and tails attached to their behinds, and so on,
the woman may not look. In most male initiations in primitive tribes
the women are kept out, for they could so easily just make a little
mocking remark about the heroes, or something like that, and
immediately the thing would fall flat. The men know very well that
they look completely ridiculous and in those demonstrative displays of
masculinity and for that reason exclude the women. Women also have
their women’s mysteries, with the girl’s first attempt at make-up and
hair styles, and the mockery of their brothers is terrible. They laugh at
the way she has made her first shy attempt at being a little feminine, so
that usually girls prefer not to get into groups at school and make their
first attempts there, for they are also ridiculous, so they hide from the
boys.
Question: Hasn’t the sinus also to do with the nose, and if so would it not
have to do with the breath of life? Isn’t the nose stopped up when there is
sinus trouble? Wouldn’t beating on the sinus imply beating on the breath of
183

Marie-Louise von Franz

life?
No, I don’t think so. After the beating one couldn’t breathe any
more, but in itself the sinus is a cavity, but what the medical function is
I have never found out. It is a kind of remnant of the past, something
like the appendix. Perhaps Dr. Mehmke can tell us about it? As far as I
know it has little functional meaning.
Answer: I think its function is that it can be infected!
So it must be like the appendix, rather meaningless thing. It has no
function in itself. I think that makes it more meaningful and supports a
prospective interpretation, for the woman in the dream does not hit on
the breath of life but on something that is really unnecessary. This is
what gives the dream a meaning which is not only negative. In other
words, if he had not got such a cavity, if he did not have this
unnecessary feminine weakness in him, she could not torture him. One
can say that if he were masculine and strong and not already infected,
and therefore weak, she would not be able to do anything. His lack of
masculinity shows in the babyish cry that he is innocent. As if that
matters! Instead of saying he is innocent, he should be furious and try
to free himself. But he has this passive reaction, his hope that his
innocence will save him—as if that would help in our world!
According to Christian teaching, evil does not exist, and if one is
innocent, everything will be all right. But Christianity by being
misinterpreted in this way has made us all infantile and has robbed us
of our sound instinctual attitude toward life. We all try to be innocent
sheep, and then we are of course helpless. There we link up with the
sheep-problem of St. Exupéry and the idea of sheep-mentality and
infantilism and a certain kind of wrong Christian attitude where one is
innocent so nothing can happen, for the protecting angels will
apparently care for you. But reality contradicts this kind of teaching
because in this world and in nature innocence does not help. It invites
the wolves.
I have very little more information on this case, so we will next go
into the puer aeternus problem as mirrored in Germany, and for this
take a book by Bruno Goetz, Das Reich ohne Raum (The Kingdon
Without Space), the first edition of which was published in 1919, the
second in 1925. It is interesting that it was written and published
before the Nazi movement came into being in 1933, before Hitler was
ruminating on his morbid ideas. Bruno Goetz certainly had a prophetic
gift about what was coming, and, as you will see, his book anticipates
the whole Nazi problem, throwing light upon it from the angle on the
184

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

puer aeternus. Goetz predicted the whole movement in his book, even
what is now happening in Germany, and I believe that through the
book we shall get into the point at which I am aiming, namely, the
religious and the time aspect of the problem of the puer aeternus.

185

Lecture 9

The Kingdom Without Space, written by Bruno Goetz, Born at Riga in
1885, is a novel, but starts off with two poems which I would like to
summarize:
When all we knew, destroyed, in ruins lay,
Encircle in death’s mighty folds of darkness,
Our burning spirits strove
After the dream which led us on.
Far from our home and our maternal land,
On undetermined waves our ship drives on.
Laughing boldly we had ventured forth
As Vikings, searching undiscovered shores.
And if by night and horror overtaken, thou sing’st
Us songs of other homes,
Then phantoms vanish into gentle mist,
The world dissolves in dance and rhythm,
The stars disperse a fortune long delayed,
And radiant shines the kingdom without space.
Then comes a second poem dedicated to “Fo,” who, as you will see, is
the puer aeternus figure in the novel:
When the dark cloud
Withdrew not from the sky
And from all the world
The sun was hid,
Out of the depths
A new light neared,
And in our sleep we knew
That Thou wert there.
186

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

O the suns that come
From the depth of thine eyes,
And from thy lips
The flowing streams of love.
Across the waves of an ethereal sea
The splendor of thy limbs
Entices us
To flaming courage.
Eternal youth,
Encircled by the music of the stars,
Giver of comfort,
Sparking, free, and beautiful.
Men and women
Dance in thy glory,
Driving into death
For the sight of thee.
Forever into light
Thy white form calls
Wave after wave,
And never do we age.
The second edition of this book was published in 1925, as I told you
last time. I have not been able to find the first, but at the end of this
edition it is said that this is the first unlimited issue and that when the
first was brought out the author was away and, either because he was
shocked or for some other stupid reason, the publisher cut out some of
the chapters—I will tell you which later—so that the first edition came
out incomplete. The book was then misunderstood as being a political
pamphlet. When the author returned he insisted on its being
completely reprinted, and when speaking of the two editions at the
end of the book, he says that he never intended it as a political
pamphlet.
It must be remembered that this was after the First World War, the
time of the great debacle in Germany, of mass unemployment and all
the post-war miseries. It was at this time that a certain pathological
dreamer, a soldier named Schikelgruber (later known as Hitler), went
about trying to form a group of young people around him with his
ecstatic and crazy political programs. Goetz’s book was published
fourteen years before the Nazis seized power in Germany, while they
were already working underground. It was a time of the utmost
collective despair, aimlessness and disorientation, a time that was in
187

Marie-Louise von Franz

certain ways similar to what we are now experiencing. Since the first
edition of the book appeared in 1919 and since the author must have
taken some time to write it, we can assume that it was being written
during the war at that the ruins alluded to in the first poem refer to the
catastrophes of that time. The author mentions the dream, so
passionately pursued, that takes them away across the sea to new
lands and into some unknown horror, and then he tells about one who
sings of a new country and of the emergence, before their eyes, of a
“kingdom without space.”
The second poem in the book begins with the same motif of a sky
darkened by clouds. Although the sun has disappeared, there is a new
light which comes from the depths and which the still sleeping people
feel as an invisible presence, described as “eternal youth encircled by
the music of the stars.” The author makes it clear that the eternal youth
is the ruler of this kingdom without space and that one has to go into
death in order to see him; that men and women dance ecstatically into
death in order to see his completely transcendental form. It is therefore
apparent that he entices people out of this world into another and
seduces them to death.
The first chapter, entitled “Schimmelberg” (White Horse Mountain),
says that the inhabitants of a little university town—the University of
Schimmelberg—well remembered the old sea captain, Wilhelm van
Lindenhuis. (The name is North German tinged with Dutch, and is
made up of the words Linde, lime, and huis, house, this “Limehouse.”)
There had been a lot of talk about his sudden death.
First his gentle, rather woebegone and sickly wife
had died, after which people noticed that he no
longer took his evening walk, but then they saw a
light in his house and his lean, furrowed face at the
windows, they thought that he must just have been
indisposed for a while and was all right again, so
they did not bother any more. One evening, however,
two unknown youths appeared wearing leather caps
and what the author describes as “weather collars,”
that is, turned-up collars for protection in bad
weather. They rang the bell at the Captain’s house
and he himself opened the door. Passers-by said that
when he saw the boys at first he recoiled as if in
surprise, but the he let them in and in a quarter of an
hour they had left the house again.
188

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

Next morning the postman could not get no
answer when he rang the bell to deliver a letter, nor
could he at midday, nor in the evening, so he
informed the neighbors, and when the door was
broken open they found the old man sitting dead in
his armchair. Apparently he had died quite peacefully
from a heart attack. On going through the house, a
crown of thorns and an ivory cross were discovered
on the son’s—that is to say, on Melchior’s—desk.
Since there was no dust on these objects, they must
have been placed there quite recently, for everything
else was thick with dust.. Every effort was made to
advise Melchior (the hero of our story) on his father’s
death; telegrams and letters were sent to him in
Rome, but all were returned and he could not be
found. Many years went by, and people had other
things to think about other than Lindenhuis and his
strange son. Only when they went by the Captain’s
empty house did they wonder where Melchior could
be and if he knew of his father’s death and why he
did not bother about the fortune he had inherited.
They said that he had always been a strange young
man, and the following old story was dug up about
him.
When he was about fifteen years old he had had
two friends—Otto von Lobe and Heinrich
Wunderlich. Otto von Lobe was a very slender,
gentle, blond, aristocratic boy, and Wunderlich was a
strong, brown, bold young man. The three became
friends and founded a mystical secret club. They read
a lot of alchemical and Rosicrucian literature and
started alchemical experiments with the idea of
finding an elixer which, when drunk, would enable
them to change shape. After many attempts they
believed that they had succeeded in producing, but
each of the three wanted to be the first to try it. Since
they could not agree, they called the whole of their
mystical club together. The others had been more
fascinated by the romantic horror of the undertaking
than by the details, which had been left to the three
189

Marie-Louise von Franz

friends, and they knew nothing of the poisonous
make-up of the drink. Lots were drawn and the lot
fell to Otto von Lobe. It was then decided to have an
all-night carouse in which their fantasy ran off into
future possibilities and what they would do when,
like magicians, they could change their shapes and
how a new era would begin and mankind would be
transformed. They became more and more ecstatic
and in the early morning ran down to the sea and
turned to the East. At the moment when the first rays
of sun appeared, Otto von Lobe sprang up, tore off
his clothes and, standing in the early light, laughed
happily and then slowly drank down the elixir. In a
few minutes he was dead. A strict investigation
followed. Melchior was expelled from the school,
having refused to make any statement, and the others
were severely punished.
Wunderlich, the strong, dark boy who had been
the third in the group, changed noticeably after this
event, dropping all unusual occupations and
becoming very cynical and conventional in a rather
pointed and exaggerated manner. He studied
medicine and as a general practitioner retired to a
little village, where he lived as a very down-to-earth,
cynical, practical man who wished to have nothing
more to do with anything fantastical.
Here we have the description of something we can recognize from
former lectures—the fallen Icarus who, after the elevation of creative
fantasy, now drops once and for all into banality.
Otto Von Lobe was dead, and the third member of the
trio, Melchior, having been expelled from school,
retired to his home and stayed shut up in his room
for many months. His father, who was very much
interested in magic and Rosicrucian writings and
alchemy, pardoned his son. Although his mother
cried about the catastrophe she also did not say much
to him. Actually, the father was rather pleased and
thought his son was following up with questions in
which he himself was interested and that he would
certainly get somewhere.
190

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

At first Melchior would sit brooding for hours in
his room, to which his food was brought up. Then he
slowly began to regain confidence and started
scientific discussions with his father who, although
interested in magic and such things, had no faith in
the possibility of the chemical transformation of the
human being. He saw that, even if it can be done, it
would have no meaning, and he saw no point in it.
That that was the son’s fanatical idea, namely, for its
own sake and without any further purpose it should
be possible to burn the original shape of the
individual to ashes and make the physical human
being transparent—a mirror for the stars, as he called
it. His father was more interested in astrology,
Melchior considered him to be a muddle-head, so
slowly they began to quarrel some more and more. In
spite of their similar interests they did not agree,
slowly drifted apart, and in time ceased to talk to
each other.
Melchior then began to visit Henriette Karlsen, the
fifteen-year-old daughter of the Director of the local
Museum. She was very beautiful, fair, slenderly built,
with pale, amber-colored eyes and limp, longfingered aristocratic hands. Sitting locked up
practically all the time in his darkened room,
Melchior once saw her crossing the street, and the
next day, for the first time he went out and they met
in the Museum. She went up to him, took both his
hands and looked at him for a long time without
saying a word, her eyes full of tears. Then Melchior
turned and hurried home. Thereafter he went to meet
her every day in the Museum, but during all this time
Henriette became paler and sadder. One day, by
chance, the old Director overheard Melchior telling
her how every night since his childhood a face had
looked in through the window. In the evening, as a
little boy, he would hear a knocking on the window,
looking up, would see a small brown-faced little boy
with eyes just like his own looking at him through the
window. When he ran toward it the vision would
191

Marie-Louise von Franz

disappear, and then he would sit and cry for hours.
These visions faded, but while he and his friends
were making the death potion which they imagined
to be a transforming elixir, he again saw the boy, this
time surrounded by other boys, looking through the
window with mocking faces. Since the catastrophe of
Otto’s death they had disappeared.
“Thank God,” said Henriette, when he told her
that.
At that Melchior went into a rage, asking how she
could say such a thing for since the boys had
disappeared he was completely alone and nobody
helped him. Otto had died merely because they had
been in too much of a hurry and had not enough
belief in the elixir, and Heinrich had betrayed them,
and his father understood nothing, so now he was
alone. To which Henriette replied that if he loved her
he must promise to forget all that and if the boys
called him he must not follow them.
In despair Melchior said how could he promise
that, how could she ask such a thing of him. He
wanted nothing more than to go with them and solve
all their riddles, Henriette with him, and he seized
her hand.
“Never!” Cried Henriette with deadly fear in her
voice. “Do you want to kill me as you killed Otto?”
Melchior then got very angry, calling her a coward,
stormed out of the room, past the dismayed Director,
and back home.
On the same day he asked his father to send him to
another town to school, to which his father agreed.
Thereafter Melchior only came home occasionally for
a few days and, after going to the University,
remained away altogether. In the little town all they
heard was that he was studying chemistry, at which
he was very good, and that he eventually got a Ph.D.
for it at Oxford. Henriette died of tuberculosis the
year he got his degree. So the one who did not want
to die, who refused contact with Melchior because
she saw that the boys represented a pull toward
192

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

death, soon died herself. A year before his mother
died, Melchior returned to Schimmelberg and stayed
three days, after which he went abroad and for a long
time traveled in India and China. Then suddenly it
was stated in the newspapers that the famous
Professor Cux of the University of Schimmelberg
needed an assistant and had taken Melchior for his
chemical investigations. So he was coming back, and
naturally everybody was very curious to meet the
man about whose youth there had been such strange
rumors.
When he returned he seemed disappointingly
normal. He had a very cold and strange personality,
with still gray eyes, but except for his rather strange
look he seemed to be an amiable and even impressive
personality. People were pleased that he was married
and fascinated by his somewhat exotic looking wife.
On the first day Professor Cux told Melchior of the
death of his father and of the strange apparition of
the two boys who had deposited the crown of thorn
and the ivory cross. When the boys were mentioned,
Melchior seemed for a moment to know nothing
about them. He just remarked that his father
sometimes had strange ideas and for no reason had
contact with people he did not know, and that he
himself did not know anything about the matter.
Melchior then took over and renovated his father’s
house, where he, but particularly his wife, started a
very social life. The whole town met there, partly out
of curiosity but also for other reasons, as we shall
soon see. Large parties were given every evening, but
Melchior himself always withdrew early, excusing
himself, and went to his study where he remained
until far into the night.
Slowly a scandal developed. Melchior began to be
careless about his scientific activities and took more
and more part in his wife’s social life, which through
him now acquired quite a different character. People
were indignant over the mocking way in which he
spoke of State and Church institutions. Above all they
193

Marie-Louise von Franz

were upset by his ever-increasing influence over the
students, whom he tried to incite against science. He
wanted to imbue them with radical skepticism
against the foundation and outcome of scientific
knowledge and the institution of the Church. He
spoke of modern science as a modern form of
intellectual illusion, saying that there was as little
certainty as there was in faith, for science too was a
pseudo-faith. At first it was thought that Professor
Cux might put a stop to this, but then slowly it was
discovered that he was completely under the charm
of his young assistant. In the end both were obliged
to stop lecturing, the Professor always supporting
Melchior in his views about science, saying that he
was quite right and what was science? What was
there in chemistry and science? Nothing! People
thought this was meant as a joke, but then it was
discovered that in all secrecy the old man had
married a young dancing girl. Everybody shook their
heads and remarked that that was the fatal influence
of a certain circle. Consequently, people drew away
from Melchior and few remained true to him.
The circle continued to meet once a week at
Melchior van Lindenhuis’s house. There were
eccentric and orgiastic parties, and although reports
were greatly exaggerated, there was said to be a
terribly immoral atmosphere. People were astonished
when the liberal-minded Lutheran priest of St.
Mary’s Church, Mr. Silverharnisk (silver harness),
also joined the circle, but he justified his visits by
saying that he was studying the uprootedness of the
modern soul! The real reasons, as you can guess,
were quite different.
Melchior himself grew more peculiar, withdrawing
entirely from the orgiastic parties given in his house.
In November the strange boys who wore the
remarkable clothes were seen around the house. Then
the townspeople remembered the curious conditions
surrounding Melchior’s father’s death and the stories
told by the old Director of the Museum about
194

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

Melchior’s conversations with Henriette when she
was sixteen years old. People came to believe that
there was some insoluble secret, and irritation and
tension increased.
The second chapter is entitled “The Meeting.”
Melchior, in a very bad temper, sat on a bench,
watching the heavy rain falling. He could not make
up his mind to go home, for he was sure that his wife
would have purposely forgotten to have his study
heated in order to force him to join the party. He
therefore preferred to freeze out of doors.
Steps on the gravel started him out of his apathy,
and with a shock he saw a boy wearing a high collar
and a leather cap loitering along the leafless alley of
the city park. When the boy came nearer , Melchior
saw a small brown face out of which the determined
yet shy, rather staring, gray eyes looked straight
ahead. He walked past Melchior, and as he passed,
looked at him briefly, smiled, and then disappeared.
Melchior gave a little cry and suddenly began to
tremble without knowing why. Then at the other end
of the alley appeared a tall man who looked
uncertainly around, took a few steps, and then,
stopping again, looked around once more.
Before the man could have seen him, the boy
suddenly rushed toward Melchior and whispered to
him to take his left hand and then quickly to put on
his glove and not be surprised at anything and not
tell anybody anything. The boy’s voice expressed
such panic and his eyes had such a feverish look and
his beautifully formed lips quivered in such fear as he
spoke, that Melchior involuntarily seized the hand
held out to him. At the same instant the boy
disappeared as though he had melted into thin air,
and on Melchior’s first figer there appeared a broad
silver ring. Still under the influence of the boy’s
frightened request, Melchior drew out his gloves and
put it on. Then, he didn’t know why, he suddenly had
a feeling of tremendous happiness and felt that
something he had long hoped for had now happened.
195

Marie-Louise von Franz

His depression disappeared completely, and full of
self-confidence he looked at the tall man from whom
the boy had fled.
When the strange man saw Melchior he stopped
and seemed undecided. He was clean-shaven, with
clear-cut but rather faded features ending in a
pointed energetic chin. His mouth was thin and large,
his nose small and bent, his cheeks sunken and his
eyes like bright transparent stones. When he raised
his hat, Melchior noticed that he had a very large
forehead and beautiful fair hair.
“Excuse me,” said the stranger, “did you perhaps
see a boy go by?”
I haven’t seen anybody,” answered Melchior
absent-mindedly.
“Is that so?” said the stranger. “Excuse me.” And
he sat down on the bench beside Melchior. “I am a
little tired. I have been running about the whole day
looking for my pupil.”
“What does he look like?” asked Melchior, and in
spite of himself had to smile.
The stranger looked very suspicious and said: “But
you did see him then? Did he speak to you? Did
he…?”
“I havent seen anybody,” interrupted Melchior. “I
have already told you so.”
“I thought from your question that you
remembered something,” said the stranger. “So you
didn’t see him! What a pity! Excuse me for persisting,
but I am very worried.”
Melchior continued to look mistrustfully at the tall
man sitting beside him. The outwardly immovable
face of the man seemed to change in expression from
one second to another. Sometimes it seemed like the
face of an old man, and sometimes there was a
childish smile, and sometimes his features appeared
severe and threatening and the eyes sparkled cold
and penetrating.
He got up and said, “Excuse me once more. I have
a request to make of you. I don’t know why, but I
196

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

have a feeling that it will be just you whom the boy
will meet. I know that he will speak to you. Don’t
listen to what he says; it’s not true. Don’t take his
hand if he asks you to. It might bring you trouble. I
warn you! And if you see him, please be so kind as to
tell me. Do not refuse to do so.”
Melchior did not answer.
“My name is Ulrich Von Spät,” said the stranger.
(Spät means “late.”) “I am staying at the Grand Hotel
and am passing through. You must think me
completely crazy, and I cannot explain the whole
thing to you, but please have confidence in me and
do what I ask you. The boy has a thin brown face,
steady gray eyes, long black hair, and wears a coat
with a high collar and a leather cap. You will certainly
recognize him. His appearance must strike you…”
At this moment Melchior dropped his head
thoughtfully but did not say a word. Mr. von Spät
waited a moment, then looked at Melchior and
sighed. Stretching out his hand to him he said, “Well,
let us hope! Auf Wiedersehen!”
Melchior suddenly felt a tremendously warm
sympathy for the man and a deep inner relationship.
He forgot the boy’s warning, took off his gloves and
shook Herr von Spät warmly by the hand, and the
latter saw the ring. His eyes flashed for a minute, but
he hid his excitement and walked quietly away.
Melchior, suddenly remembered the ring on his
finger, felt as though he had betrayed the boy. Only
when it occurred to him that the stranger might not
have seen it did he calm down a little, but without
forgiving himself for his carelessness.
“What can that mean?” he thought, “I am losing
control over myself. Things happen to me as if in a
dream. Who was that stranger? What power had he
over me that I suddenly loved him so that I forgot
who he was? He is my enemy!”
The third chapter is entitled “Fo”—the name of the boy.
On the way home Melchior felt as though he were
dematerialized. Streets, walls, houses, surrounded
197

Marie-Louise von Franz

him, tall and strange. They seemed to be made of air.
It was as though he walked through them. They
divided like curtains in front of him and closed
behind him like clouds of mist. Everything was
changed; buildings which he knew had existed in
former times but were long gone, were suddenly
there again. It was no longer the same town through
which he walked.
The people also seemed changed. He caught
fleeting glances and felt as though he looked into his
own eyes as into a mirror. A smile, a wave of the
hand, seemed to him an indication, a greeting, a sign
of secret understanding.
Near the station, under a gigantic umbrella, sat a
fat old woman selling apples. He went up to her,
bought a couple of apples and put them in his pocket.
To her astonishment, he stroked the wrinkled cheeks
of the woman. “Yes, yes,” he said, beaming, “we
know each other. We are old friends. Do you see this
ring on my finger? You never saw it before, did you?
Nobody else may see it. That means that I am going
away now, far away. You know how it is when
someones wants to go far away and suddenly it is
time, and one goes.”
The woman didn’t seem to understand and looked
uneasy.
“I know,” he went on, “that I don’t need to tell you
all this. We know each other so well. We have known
each for a long time, ever since childhood…”
The woman, who had become more and more
nervous, looked all around and at last, pulling herself
together, interrupted Melchior: “Aren’t you ashamed
of talking like that to an old woman?”
“You don’t know me?” asked Melchior. “Why,
suddenly, don’t you want to know me? You always
sat at some corner when I was on the road. I always
saw you when I left a place or arrived somewhere.
Don’t you remember how you sat at the station in
Genoa with a bright parrot on your shoulder, and on
my arrival I bought oranges from you? And in
198

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

Vienna? In St. Petersburg? In Stockholm? In a
hundred other cities! You were always there and
greeted me with your fruit when I arrived and
watched me when I left.”
“There is some mistake, Sir,” said the woman
mistrustfully. “I have never been away from here.”
Melchior looked her straight in the eyes and shook
his head and finally said in a low voice. “I
understand. You are careful. You don’t want to be
overheard. The stranger is here—our enemy. It was
careless of me to talk to you. We may have been
watched. Only I was so glad to see you. Now I know
I am going away.”
At this moment he saw a boy going past the applewoman’s stall who looked at him sharply and put his
finger to his lips in warning and then rapidly went
around the corner. It couldn’t have been the same as
the one who had disappeared, for this ones face was
smaller, browner, bolder. Only the still gray eyes were
alike.
Melchior nodded good-bye to the woman and
went quickly away. “Who was it who warned me?”
he thought. “He wore the same clothing as the one
who disappeared. What circle have I run into? What
is it that surrounds and captivates me? I have seen it
all some time in a dream. The many trusted faces on
the street, the wink and nods and greetings, the two
boys, the stranger—But I can’t remember. And the
apple woman…Why did I say all that to her? It was
idiotic! How should she know me? Old women sit in
all railway stations. And yet, it was the same face, the
same hair, the same wrinkles, the same voice…”
When he neared his home, Melchior saw in the
dusk a number of boys who broke up at the sight of
him and hid behind the corner of the house and
peeped out curiously.
“It is becoming more and more confusing,” he
thought. “Now there is a whole band of them!”
The windows of his dwelling, which was on the
ground floor, were all lit up. There was the sound of
199

Marie-Louise von Franz

laughter and confused talking and music. Among the
murmur of many voices he thought he recognized the
clear voice of Mr. von Spät. Then it occurred to him
that he had never given von Spät his name or told
him where he lived, so how could he be there?
Melchior decided he had been mistaken.
In order to not be seen he went in the back door
and straight to his study. There it was cold and dark.
He turned on the light and lay down his damp coat
on the couch. The ring, which was loose on his finger,
fell to the ground. In a fright he looked up.
The boy who had disappeared stood by the couch
and looked at him, smiling, “You’re cold,” he said.
“I’ll light a fire.” He lit the fire in the stove and then
threw off his coat and cap and stood by Melchior.
“I knew that I would find you, Melchior,” he said.
“I had seen in your eyes that you would help me. You
belong to us even though you don’t know it. I thank
you. We all thank you.”
“Who are you? Who are you all? Asked Melchior.
“I don’t understand what is happening. Who is the
strange man? How do you know my name?”
“I have known about you for long. I am called Fo. I
cannot tell you my real name. None of us may say
that. We give ourselves nicknames so that we may
speak to each other. Who are we? You will find out
when you live with us. You have only to cry out that
you want to go away and we will come fetch you. But
be careful of the stranger! He is our worst enemy! He
saw the ring on your finger, and he will try to catch
you. He has a secret which makes him very powerful.
I was once in his power and could only get away by
tricking him. I will tell you about it later when you
come to us. You are still living among the others, and
I cannot yet tell you anything. And now—thank you,
and let me go. The others are waiting for me.”
Melchior heard a noise at the window and saw
many faces pressed against the window-panes,
looking in out of the darkness into the bright room.
“I wont let you go,” cried Melchior, “until you
200

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

have told me everything, How do I know that you
will come when I call? How can I follow you when I
don’t know who you are? How can I resist the
stranger when “I don’t know his secret?”
“Who we are you can only know by living, not by
talking. You will follow us if your heart drives you.
We are always there when called. We ourselves don’t
know the stranger’s secret; if we did he would not
have any power over us. I have answered you. Now
let me go.”
“You want to run away from me,” said Melchior,
“but I know how to stop you with the ring.”
“The ring won’t help you Melchior,” said the boy,
laughing. “It turns your life into mystery and
confusion and change. But you won’t get away. If you
were to keep the ring, the town would aways be to
you as it was on your way home today. You would
unravel nothing; you would take friends for enemies
and enemies for friends, for you would not
undersstand the signs which would explain them.
Come with us and then you will be free. Call us when
you want us. Until then, let me go. Open the
window.”
Still Melchior hesitated. Then he stood up silently,
looked at Fo for a long time, and opened the window
for him. The boy jumped out, and the crowd outside
encircled him. They took one another’s hands. A
flame shot up in their midst, split up into sparks, and
they all disappeared.
You see that the story is very suggestive! It is something like Edgar
Allen Poe’s stories and might have been influenced by the Kubin’s The
Other Side by E.T.A. Hoffman. It is the kind of novel in which suddenly
banal reality is dissolved in the mysterious events of the other side,
where, in our language, the unconscious penetrates and dissolves the
world of consciousness, and where from then on anything and
everything can happen.
Mrs. Volkhardt has called my attention to the fact that not only
Kubin, but also Gustav Meyrinck wrote at this time in Munich, so there
was really a whole school of writers of this type of story in Germany.
Meyrinck was also interested in alchemical experiments and bought
201

Marie-Louise von Franz

old lavatories in the Prague ghetto because he had read in alchemical
books that very old human excrement contained the mystical stuff of
the Philosophers’ Stone. He cooked this substance (he gave a
description in a letter) and it exploded in his face! He also had contacts
and conversations with ghosts. A whole circle of people there
experienced the unconscious under a parapsychological aspect. To
them the unconscious was the spirit world, and they tried to contact it
by parapsychological and magical means. They fell back onto the
Rosicrucian and Freemason and other traditions, from which they tried
to obtain some knowledge of the world of the Beyond. Not having the
key concepts provided by psychology, it was their only way of
approach. Bruno Goetz is of this type and belongs to this period.
The name of the town, “White horse mountain,” is also meaningful,
for the white horse is a very well-known attribute, and sometimes a
personification, of the old god Wotan, who either appeared riding on
the eight-legged white horse Sleipnir or was replaced by this magic
horse. Those who have read Alfred Kubin’s The Other Side know that a
mad white horse who races through a destroyed world plays a similar
role. Wotan retired to the mountain but will reappear at the end of time
and reestablish his eternal and happy empire.
Lindenhuis, the family name of the hero of the story, means “Lime
Tree House,” and in olden times in most small German towns and
villages there was usually a lime tree in the center of town. It is a
feminine symbol and was dedicated to nature goddesses like Perchta,
Hulda, Holle (plus all her other names). It was thought that the souls
of unborn children lived under the leaves of the tree, and it was the
mystical tree in the midst of the village around which the whole of life
centered, very much like the central pole which, for instance, you find
in American Indian rituals. Old Lindenhuis, the father, is a sea-captain,
and all the other names are slightly distorted by North German or
Dutch dialects to draw attention to the fact that we are concerned with
a North German country and its overseas contacts. Also, in the
opening poem there is an allusion to seafaring people, the still living
Viking spirit being a personification of the restlessness and
transcendental eternal longing which is typical of Teutonic peoples. We
cannot interpret the details in the book until later, for so far we have no
key as to what the ivory cross and the crown of thorns allude to. The
explanation comes only in the later chapters.
The rumors which spread about the hero of the story contain a very
typical feature. For instance, there are three boys: Otto von Lobe, an
202

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

aristocratic type, dedicated to death, and described as being very
delicate, and Heinrich Wunderlich, who is described as being very
vital. Those two are obviously opposite shadow figures of Melchior’s:
one could be called a personification of the sensitive , artistic
personality with a strong suicidal tendency, and Heinrich Wunderlich,
the vital side of Melchior’s personality which pulls toward adaptation
to life and who therefore cuts off all the juvenile romantic longings.
Otto von Lobe dies from drinking the elixir, and through the shock
Wunderlich becomes quite cynical and realistic. You could say that one
part of Melchior dies and another part of him reacts to that with a
tendency to cynicism. The ego complex, which would be represented
by Melchior himself, is between the two. As we hear, he retires into his
room and into a deeply depressed introversion after the shock, while
Otto von Lobe, the real puer aeternus in him, dies. It is well known that
between the ages of fifteen and twenty suicides occur frequently, for it
is a period when the pull toward death is strong. Generally, it is
connected with puer aeternus problems—a crucial time when these
problems are urgent.
Melchior describes how, from the time he was a little boy, he aways
saw his double at the window. What does that mean? I will read you
the exact passage:
Father was at sea or occupied in some way, and
Mother leant over the Bible, and he himself felt lost
and sad. And then he heard a knocking at the
windows and saw the pale brown face with eyes
resembling his own, and that aways made him cry
bitterly. His mother never knew about it, but he told
his father, who only smiled but gave no answer.
Naturally, you can say that that was Melchior’s early experience which
foreshadowed all that was to come later, but I think we should amplify
this with a very well-known fact, namely, that in early youth lonely
children tend to produce a double personality with whom they
entertain themselves. This double is the coming-alive of the
unconscious personality, due to loneliness. It is typical that it is
described in this way, namely, that he is a lonely child and in moments
when he sadly realizes his loneliness this apparition appears. There are
children who invent such a double and personify it and play with it for
hours. Often this fantasy figure of early youth later reappears in
dreams and really becomes a personification of whole unconscious. It
is the shadow, the anima and the Self, still in one. It is the whole other
203

Marie-Louise von Franz

side of the personality.
We are always inclined to think of the unconscious in terms of the
different classifications of Jungian Psychology, so we could debate
whether this first apparition is the Self or the shadow, but we should
never forget that these concepts are only valid in certain psychological
situations. When a human being first meets the unconscious in an
autonomous form, either in childhood, or for instance, in the beginning
of an analysis, there is no question of shadow, animus or anima, and
Self. The first experience we usually have when we encounter the
unconscious is with what we could best call the other side. In those
early stages it is personified in different forms, and it is advisable in
analysis not to start introducing these formal concepts but to let the
person first simply experience that there is another side to the ego and
its ordinary world. It is only after some time, when the fact of a
completely different part of the personality has been realized, another
inhabitant in our inner house, that then we slowly discern figures in
the half darkness of the unconscious such as that of the inferior man,
whom we might classify under the name of shadow, and the figure of
the heterosexual partner, which me might classify under the name of
anima, just to bring some order into that other side. But in itself, as a
reality, it is really the impact of the unknown part of the personality.
You will find all over the world that the first meeting with the
unconscious is often with such a personification, or a double, in which
shadow, Self and anima (if it is a man) are completely one.
There is the same idea in Persian teaching, which says that after
death the noble man meets either a youth who looks exactly like
himself (because in death he turns again into his beautiful and noble
stature) or a girl of fifteen (that is, the anima). If he asks the girl who it
is, it will say, “I am thy own self.” If the man has been virtuous, then
this figure is shining and beautiful. By living virtuously , with the right
kind of religious attitude, he develops a double in the Beyond, and the
moment of death brings reunion with the other half. This Persian myth
has survived in certain Gnostic and Manichaen traditions in late
antiquity. There it is absolutely irrelevant whether the figure appears
as a shining youth or as a girl, for its answer to the dying person is the
same, namely, “I am thy own self, thy other half.”
This is a very primitive, archetypal idea. In many primitive societies,
it is thought that every human being on entering this world is only a
half, the other half being the placenta, that is, that part of the
personality which has not entered this world. It is therefore ritually
204

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

buried, or dried and worn in a capsule around the neck, and is the
magic substance in which the double is supposedly located (the
transcendental double, the other personality), and there is the same
idea that after death the two become one again. There is even a myth
which says that the first man was complete in heaven, but when he
was incarnated in this world he was only a half, and, therefore the first
man, who is mythologically exactly the same type as our figure of
Adam, is called the “Half One.” So you could say that that any human
apparition is only a half; the other remains in the land of death in the
Beyond, and one joins it after death. What this means ultimately we do
not know because it is an archetypal representation whose meaning we
can never exhaust intellectually. But we can say that among other
things it mirrors the basic realization that the growth of consciousness,
which begins in early youth and increases, is a halving of the total
personality, and the more one becomes conscious the more one loses
one’s other half, which is the unconscious. It mirrors, as it were, the
split of the human being into a conscious and an unconscious
personality, and there are early-youth experiences in which this is
realized.
I once read in the Neue Zurcher Zeitung a story told by a Hungarian
officer which illustrates this. Before the first World War he was the only
child of an aristocratic Hungarian family and was so lonely, having
nobody to play with, that he invented a brother whom he called
Stepanek and imagined as a very tough red-haired little boy. In his
imagination this little boy would do all the mischief he hoped, or
would have liked, to do, but for which he hadn’t the courage. In his
fantasy he lived mainly in imagining what his Stepanek would do.
When he went to school and found real comrades, the figure faded and
was forgotten. And then he said (and I am just repeating the story) that
in the First World War he was shot and wounded. He fainted and came
around after a time, bleeding and shivering and in a very bad state.
And he saw a human figure bending over him, a red-haired man of
thirty, and thinking it was somebody who had come to rescue him he
muttered, “who are you?” The other whispered “Stepanek!” The next
thing he remembered was that he was being taken care of in a hospital
and slowly coming back to himself. He was very much puzzled about
whether he had an hallucination—whether he had projected
something onto the man who had brought him in, who perhaps had
been a black-haired Red Cross man. He tried to follow up the problem
and so asked the doctors and personnel at the hospital how he had got
205

Marie-Louise von Franz

there, but nobody knew! The nurse knew he had been brought to the
ward, and that he had been found on a stretcher in the hospital
courtyard, but nobody knew who had brought him there, and could
never find out! He said that he didn’t want to theorize about it but that
those were the facts. I have a rational explanation: As you see from the
childhood story, Stepanek was his more ordinary and vital part, his
inferior personality, the red-haired fellow who dared to do all the
things he did not dare do. He himself was rather an introverted,
sensitive kind of boy, and I think it quite likely that in the war
situation, in a half-dazed way, he managed to drag himself to the
hospital and was therefore literally saved by his inner instinctive
personality, Stepanek. Then he broke down in the courtyard where he
was found. His wound was not too bad. That seems to me the only
possible explanation. The other possibility is that a man from the
lazaret had picked him up and that in this dazed condition he had
projected Stepanek onto him. Nobody knows!
This is only to illustrate that fact that the lonely child very often
finds a companion in the unconscious other half and thereby
experiences the unconscious, but normally these shadow figures, and
the other side, are at this age projected onto other children who take
over the role of “the other.” It also shows the problem of a certain
amount of dissociation , a dissociation of the personality, which then
comes up again in this rather exaggerated, romantic fit which the boys
experience at school when Otto von Lobe dies from the elixir. The
fascination comes from the idea that the human individual, in its
material shape, could be transformed and dematerialized and then
become, as Melchior says later to his father, a mirror of the stars. So, at
the bottom, the fascinating idea of an alchemical transformation haunts
all those boys, and the accidents happens through their attempt to put
it into reality. There we see clearly that this double —the puer aeternus
boy—has to do with the Self and that the realization of the Self, as it is
presented in the alchemical process, is the real fascinosum. There you
also see how the two rhythms set in, namely, the pull to death,
expressed in Otto von Lobe, and the cynical pull toward reality,
personified in Heinrich Wunderlich. I think we cannot say more about
it until we see how it all turns out.
The next thing is that during Melchior’s retirement into his dark
room a first meeting with the feminine principle takes place, for when
he shut up in his room, having been expelled from school and quite
under the shock of Otto von Lobe’s death, he discovers the girl,
206

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

Henriette Karlsen, who later dies from tuberculosis. He quarrels with
her, as you remember, because she does not want to follow him into
death. She feels that those boys he always sees and the vision he has of
the boys mean a romantic pull toward death and does not want to
follow them. All the same she dies afterward. In anticipation of the
story, I can tell you that the hero in it never unites with a woman in a
real way. The marriage is nothing, for there is no relationship but
complete hatred and disappointment on both sides. It is a complete
fiasco. There is thus the same problem as in The Little Prince, for the
contact with the anima does not work. Here is a different variation.
You remember that the little prince also quarrels with the rose and
leaves her on the planet. There the anima figure is also not so
aristocratic and lacking in vitality but rather childish and haughty and
difficult to get on with. This girl, however, is more the aristocratic
“broken lily,” a very attractive anima type. But how would you
interpret it psychologically? The first love of a man is always very
meaningful, for the girl then is more the anima than she is real, and
usually these love affairs do not end in marriage. It is mostly an anima
fascination linked up with the mother in this story—that she was a sad,
suffering woman who sat reading the Bible— and obviously Henriette
Karlsen is a replica of the mother-image. Sometimes men have a
different animae, and one of them is like that, but there are also others
to compensate. If that is the dominant type, however, what conclusion
would you draw? What does that predict?
Answer: That his vitality is feeble.
Not necessarily his vitality, but the feeling side; his eros is weak. He
himself is not necessarily weak, for Heinrich Wunderlich is a vital type,
the one who becomes the cynical realist, so it could mean that it would
still be possible for the ego to be quite realistic. What would you guess
if you met someone between eighteen and twenty who has such an
anima figure? What would he look like if you met him again at fifty? I
would say that he has every chance of becoming either homosexual or
remaining a bachelor. Those would be the two possibilities because the
whole relationship to the feminine side and to feeling—to eros,
relationship—is weak and very likely to die, that is, to fade away. I
have seen more cases like this among determined bachelors than
among homosexuals.
I know of a man who got engaged three times to a dying girl and
never understood that this must have something to do with him. After
the funeral of the third girl he thought he was just persecuted by fate
207

Marie-Louise von Franz

and gave up. I knew him as a very old bachelor—a very nice man. He
never saw that his anima-constellation made him choose such women,
that he had a real instinct for picking out the doomed woman. He
always got engaged correctly and meant to marry, but the girl died,
one from tuberculosis and one in an accident, and the third I don’t
remember how. What was so striking about this old man was the
terrific sensitivity which he covered up by his odd behavior and
scurrility. He went about dirty, covered with tabacco, and lived in a flat
like a cave, decorated with beautiful things, but ash and cigars over
everything. The mere mention of a charwoman put him into a rage,
and he would shout about women—especially charwomen—who
disturb everything. He was very artistic and had a beautiful collection;
he knew more about art, with feeling and understanding, than
anybody I have met since. He was the type of the spiritually, highly
cultivated, funny bachelor!
You could see clearly that his anima was so sensitive that he could
never get near a woman or make a friend of a woman, or even make
male friends; his feeling was too delicate and too easily hurt. The only
way he could survive was by keeping away from any close contact
with other human beings. What saved him was his tremendous sense
of humor. He always laughed at his own sensitivity, covering it up
with ironic remarks, a trick of many sensitive people. He made fun of
himself so as to keep his shell whole. That is the usual behavior of a
man with this special predilection for dying girls. The other possibility
is a relationship to someone of the same sex, becoming homosexual,
because there a passion and the realization of the marriage relationship
with its disagreeable and wounding realities can be escaped. The
similarity to the Little Prince is that the puer aeternus problem is here
again connected with the problem of the weak anima figure and weak
eros side, and relationship to the other sex is a problem.
Then there is a strange paradox, namely, that the girl Henriette, the
only anima figure he meets before his wife, wants to prevent him from
following up the romantic pull from the Beyond. Then she herself died.
How would you interpret that? In a way she does the right thing, for
she warns him and tries to get him over onto this side and this life. But
then she goes.
Remark: He had projected a sickly anima onto her.
Yes, and when she protests, then the anima projection falls off. If she
had joined in with his romantic plans, she would have carried out the
role of the anima, but by calling him away from those plans she refuses
208

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

to take on that role. Why is not explained in the story, but at that
moment the anima projection falls off because for him to be able to
continue his projection she must cooperate in the pull toward death.
Moreover, Melchior had chose her because she was a dying person,
which apparently the girl herself did not know and was consciously
not attracted by death. This also shows a tendency typical of young
people which is indicative of a certain weakness, namely, that he
belongs to the type of person who, when a projection falls off, does not
carry the relationship—another sign of his eros weakness.
Some people, when they notice that the other person is not what
they had assumed, are pulled by natural curiosity to find out more
about the matter. They think it odd that they were so attracted by a
woman who ceased to attract when she proved to be quite different.
They try to find out what happened and why the attraction faded. In
that way there is a chance of realizing the projection. But those who, as
soon as they are disappointed, just finish, always remain in the
projection. If one is disappointed, that is just the time to follow the
relationship, at least for a while, in order to find out what happened.
That is actually how Jung discovered, in himself, the anima. Being
again disappointed in a woman, he asked himself why on earth he had
expected anything else—what had made him expect something
different? Through asking such questions and realizing an expectation
which did not fit the outer figure, he discovered the image inside.
It is therefore always helpful if a relationship—not only a
heterosexual relationship—disappoints you, to ask yourself such
questions: Why did I not see that before? What did I expect? Why did I
have a different image of this person?—Where did the error come
from? For the error is something real too. If one can do this, it indicates
a desire to hold on to the human relationship and take back the
illusion. When one does that and makes an effort to establish the
relationship on its own level, then the illusions must be investigated as
something interesting. But people with weak feeling tend to break off
the relationship as soon as the other person disappoints them. They
just walk out because it is no longer interesting, and question about
why one had the wrong expectation and why one is hurt are not asked.
Question: But isn’t there something in the other person which formed the
hook for the projection?
Yes, but one can only discover that if one goes on after the
disappointment. Then one might find it. At first one thinks one knows
the other person, for when I project I have the strong feeling of
209

Marie-Louise von Franz

intimate knowledge. At the first meeting there is no need to talk: you
know everything about each other—that is a complete projection—the
wonderful feeling of being one and having known each other for many
ages. Then suddenly the other behaves in an unexpected way and
there is disappointment. One falls out of the clouds and feels that “this
is not it.” If you then go on, you must do two things, for now there is a
double war: you must find out why you had such an illusion and who
the other person is if he or she is not what you expected. Who is he or
she in reality? That is a long job, and when you have done that—have
found the root of your own illusion and how the other person seems to
be when looked at without projection—then you may ask why your
illusion chose that person to fall upon? And that is very difficult, for
sometimes the hook is big, and sometimes very small, because the
other person may have only few characteristics that fit the projection,
so it may be more—or less—of an illusion. There are all degrees.
Obviously Melchior is the type who goes as soon as the projection
falls off, as soon as the other person does not behave as expected. He
even calls Henriette a coward: he just insults her and leaves her.
Subjectively, that shows the weakness of his dying eros function. It is
not even said that he was sorry afterward or suffered from unhappy
love and disappointment. Other boys who had such a silly experience
with a girl at that age would sit down and write endless insulting
letters, accusing her of being a cow and not understanding, and so on.
They would follow up the problem, and this would show relatedness.
It would be an attempt, even though based on error and projection; it
would indicate a passionate interest in the other human being. But
here there is nothing of the kind—he just writes the whole thing off,
just like the little prince, only in a rather different form, for the latter
leaves the planet and the rose, although she feels sorry and says, “Yes,
yes, go, go!” Out of pride, she sends him away. If someone writes off
his relationship so quickly, you may be sure that he will write himself
off equally quickly. That is the suicidal type of person.
Here there is the weak anima, typical of the suicidal tendency in the
unconscious. That is how, to a certain extent, one can discover suicidal
tendencies beforehand. I have met two types: one is not really suicidal
but could finish himself off in a rage—a kind of accident. There are
irascible people (really something of the murderer type) who get
sudden fits of rage which may also go against themselves, when they
can kill themselves by mistake. They lose their heads—and if they
could survive they would be very sorry! That is not a genuine suicidal
210

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

tendency. It is an inverted aggression. The aggressiveness is not
integrated and may suddenly turn against the person himself—like the
scorpion’s sting! But Melchior is the true suicidal type, and such
people secretly, intellectually and coldly, write off those in their inner
surroundings and also themselves. They never really trust themselves
or those around them—there are no real relationships. That is
something which runs through his whole book—there is not
relatedness. That is the fatal thing right from the beginning.
After this comes the quarrel between Melchior and his father, which
is very important. Melchior is still pursuing the idea of the
transformation of the personality, while his father is an astrologer, a
magician, and is also interested in occult sciences, not, however, for the
sake of transformation of the personality but rather out of curiosity or
as a pseudo-scientific occult occupation. This is where father and son
clash emotionally and then again write each other off. It is another
breaking-off reaction. This is so important because it indicates the main
problem—the enmity of Fo, the boy, and Ulrich von Spät, his
adversary. At the beginning, Ulrich von Spät pretended to be Fo’s tutor
and wanted to catch him in some way and keep Melchior away from
his influence. The boy, on the other hand, is afraid of Ulrich von Spät
and runs away from him all the time. He tries to bring Melchior under
his own influence, and you will see that this battle continues. At one
time Melchior really loves Ulrich von Spät; that is the moment when
he takes off his glove and shakes hands with him and thus gives away
the fact that he is wearing the ring. At other times he hates and wants
to avoid him. We should go into this. Ulrich “Late” is an allusion to the
fact that he is the elder and would have the father role in relation to the
boy. He pretends to be the spiritual mentor, or tutor, or father, so
obviously this conflict is a further development of the one we already
saw between father and son. If the son believes in the transformation
of the personality—in a most unreal and fantastic way admittedly, but
still he believes in it—and the father is also interested in magic and
occult sciences, but not for the same reason, what two worlds clash
there?
Answer: The two generations.
Yes, the father refused transformation and wanted to keep that
status quo, while the son wanted renewal. If you refer that to the idea
of the transformation of the personality in alchemy, what then?
Answer: The material and the spiritual are separated. In writing off his
father he has written off the material side. Melchior is consciously searching
211

Marie-Louise von Franz

on the spiritual level, but the material side then becomes the shadow.
Yes, but it is very subtle. In a way, the father is the material side—or
which would you say he was?
Answer: He is both, for he is the wise old man and the magician!
You see, in a way, he is both! Because he studies the book, he is the
spiritual side—he is investigating this world mentally—with a secret
materialism. The other way around you could say that the Fo
archetype is a spiritual archetype. It is the élan vital, the spiritual
element, but at the same time that is materialistic too because the boys
wanted to transform the personality with real poison. That is
materialism. So in both figures spirit and matter fall apart, and when
the one adopts a materialistic trend, the other breaks with the spiritual
attitude. When the other takes on the materialistic trend, then Fo pulls
for the spiritual attitude. So I agree that spirit and matter have fallen
apart in the wrong way—but in both! And what is lacking? If spirit
and matter have fallen apart, who is lacking?
Answer: The anima.
Yes, the psyche, that which is between the two. That is why in both
opposite positions, in both enemy positions, there is a seperation of
mind and matter. There is no vinculum amoris (bond of love) to unite
them, for the anima is lacking. So the father has spiritual interests with
a secret materialistic background, and the son has chemicalmaterialistic interests with a spiritual background, and they clash and
cannot understand each other.
In a very real way, we have now the same problem collectively.
Think of such movements as anthroposophy. In Los Angeles, for
instance, there is a new sect, founded by Manley Hall, whose members
consider themselves to be something like the New Rosicrucians. There
is a revival of interest in magic, in Freemasonry symbolism, in
Rosicrucian symbolism, and in astrology and the occult sciences. The
followers of these movements all reject psychology. They want the
Beyond to be called the ghost world, or they claim that an apparition
of the animus is an angel from the Beyond, and they give factors,
which we try to name in a psychological way, old names which they
take out of the old traditional books. In Basel there is a man named
Julius Schwabe, the founder of the Congresses on Symbolism held
there every year. He invited people to report on symbolism and has
professors from all schools. For instance, some talk on Tibetan
medicine. He also once invited me to speak on Jungian psychology. As
chairman he sums up, at the end, in occult terminology, and covers
212

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

everything up by saying that such and such thing is the old figure X of
the Beyond, while the unconscious is called the “transcendental spirit
world,” and so on.
This is really Mr. von Spät (Mr. Late) because every one of his
explanations is a backward pull. The explanations regress to medieval,
and to even Sumerian and Babylonian, magical concepts. Or the
speakers use concepts of the sixteenth century, or Paracelsus, and they
are all nicely muddled up! It is a beautiful pot pourri of concepts from
the past, pulled out of their context and now used as a name for the
phenomenon of what we call the unconscious. That way everything is
explained and made quite clear by just using the old names, that is,
sticking them onto the phenomena. But behind that there is a
tremendous power gesture. For instance, Schwabe would say here,
“Well, Fo is, for instance, the Hermes infans, Mercurius infans, the young
Mercurius.” And then one feels that something has been said! That is
Mr. von Spät! The outer and inner realm fall apart in this way, as well
as spirit and matter, and any other factor.
If a man, for instance, has an obligation to his anima, and to the
woman with whom he made friends, or married, then he gets into a
typical duality situation of life where one always has a real conflict, a
double obligation, and where one is always torn between obligations
to the outer and to the inner side of life. That would be the realization
of the crucifixion, or of the basic truth of life! Life is double—it is a
double obligation, it is a conflict in itself—because it always means the
collision, or conflict, of two tendencies. But that is what makes up life!
That realization escapes von Spät completely, or he escapes the
realization! It does not even occur to him, and that is one more of the
little, but fatal, turns in the story which point toward its tragic end.

213

Lecture 10

Last time I tried to give you an outline of Mr. von Spät, who is the
great riddle in the book. The conflict between him and the boys
mirrors, on a superpersonal level, the conflict which has already begun
on the personal level between Melchior and his father. Melchior is
seeking an elixer of transformation in black magic, and his father is
studying magic for its own sake out of curiosity, or the desire for such
knowledge (although one doesn’t feel he is seeking something
especially creative in it). Father and son quarrel and break apart over
this. Now the conflict appears on a much wider scale between the
paternal protector and the runaway boy who gives the ring to
Melchior, for Mr. von Spät alludes to the fact that he is chasing the boy
to bring him under his power. But before we amplify these figures
further I will give you a few more chapters of the book.
You remember that when Melchior has returned to his own home,
suddenly the boy appears and warns him against him against von
Spät, saying, “You belong to us, stay with us, and dont fall into the
snares of von Spät. He has a secret with which he can petrify us.”
Melchior, asks what the secret is, and the boy says that if they knew
they would be free but they do not. Then he takes away the ring he
had given Melchior, saying it would would only pull him into
complete chaotic confusion, and disappears out of the window in a
spark of light.
The next chapter begins with someone knocking at the door, but a
Melchior does not answer.
The door opens carefully and his wife Sophie looks
in. She is small and delicate looking, with black hair,
and green eyes look at Melchior, her sensual and
214

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

rather shapeless lips quivering a little.
“There you are again,” she says, “alone in your
cold room. Won’t you come down? We are having
such an interesting party.”
You know I don’t want to have anything to do with
those people,” he answers bitterly. “Why didn’t you
have my room heated? (He knows it was a trick to
force him to join the party.)
“I’m sorry. I forgot, says Sophie.
“You always forget when you have company, he
replies. “You always want me to meet people who
hold me back. I have no time for them.”
You have no time for me either,” says Sophie.
“With those people I can talk in a human way that
bores you.”
“Yes, always talking and chewing over the same
thing does bore me,” says Melchior. “You sniff at
everything, and it is always the same stuff.”
A very angry expression crosses his wife’s face, but
she controls herself and answers quietly, “I like to feel
myself among familiar things, but you cant bear
them. You always want to make me and everybody
else feel insecure, and try to take the ground away
from under our feet. People have become quite stupid
after they have met you, and it is impossible to have
any serious conversation with them; they begin to
talk nonsense.”
“Yes, you can’t understand me,” says Melchior.
“You always are so sure. I can only tell you that your
security is a complete illusion, just as the former
security of your people was self-deception. The
smallest thing upsets them, for there is nothing either
above or below. Only the person who has gone
through complete dissolution and chaos can talk
about security. I do not trust any solidity, or gestalt, or
performance, or security.”
Impatiently Sophie says, “Well, our guests are
waiting. Come along! Today it is absolute chaos, for
someone who causes even more confusion than you,
a new man who talks very strangely and pretends
215

Marie-Louise von Franz

that he has only to command and an army of ghosts
will obey him.”
Melchior smiles and then says, “Does he talk about
ghosts? You would rather believe in ghosts than in
the spirituality of the world. Who is this ghostconjurer?”
“An old acquaintance of mine,” says Sophie, “from
my home town. We played together as children. But
everybody always had to obey him, and we could
never play as we wanted. He was small and weak,
but nobody ever dared fight him. I left home very
early and had never heard of him again. Now after
fifteen years he has turned up unexpectedly, so I
asked him to stay for tea.”
“What is his name?”
“Ulrich von Spät!”
So we discover that von Spät was a friend of Melchior’s wife when she
was a young girl.
He says, Oh yes, he is staying at the Grand Hotel isn’t
he?”
“Oh, I just got to know him by chance a couple
hours ago, and now he has sneaked into our party on
the excuse of knowing you.” And he becomes very
excited.
Sophie says mockingly, “Now, all of a sudden, you
have become very lively. Now you are interested. I
see that now I must just get crazy people to come to
my party in order to get you interested.”
Melchior interrupts her, saying “Come on, let’s go
to the party.”
When they near the room, Mr. von Spät can be
heard saying, “Ladies and gentlemen, you laugh at
what I say, but I can assure you that I can show you
things like a fairy tale come to life. Every one of you I
can shut up in this little bottle which I hold in my
hand.”
As Melchior opens the door and comes in with his
wife, there are shouts of laughter. He is immediately
surrounded and notices that they all look excited and
feverish, and he wonders whether Mr. von Spät is
216

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

responsible for it all.
“Hullo, old man!” shouts the fat, vulgar art critic,
Heinrich Trumpelsteg, patting him on the shoulder.
“You have come at just the right time; your famous
friend is about to show us a couple of tricks.”
But Melchior’s boss, Professor Cux, with his Goldrimmed spectacles, appears and introduces his wife,
the dancer, a boyish-looking girl, her whole face
powdered green and her lips violet. Melchior is
amazed by the whole company, and Professor Cux
very tactlessly says, “Look at my wife! See how
beautiful she is, and just look at these legs!” He lifts
her skirt above the knees, and says, “And a further
view is more fascinating!
Everybody laughs at this joke, Frau Cux loudest of
them all, and the women lift up their skirts and show
their calves, each saying that hers are the prettiest
legs, so Trumpelsteg says, “All right ladies, I suggest
we have a beauty show. Take off your clothes and
show yourselves in all your beauty, and we will
decide who is the most beautiful. Like the Greeks we
want nothing but beauty, beauty!”
There are shouts of “Hurrah!” and a confusion of
arms and legs and articles of clothing ensues, and in a
few minutes all the women stand there naked.
Melchior looks across at his wife and sees that she too
has undressed and is looking at him mockingly.
“What on earth is happening here?” wonders
Melchior. “It’s like a madhouse. Mr. von Spät must
have this strange effect. Do my ideas seem like that to
people they think about them?” (He always wants to
make people feel uncertain by destroying their false,
bourgeois certainty, but here he asks himself whether
this would be the result.)
Mrs. Cux dances naked through the room,
embracing everybody, and all the women follow suit,
hitting , scratching, biting and kissing each other, the
men applauding violently. Melchior turns away and
approaches Mr. von Spät, who comes toward him
holding out his hand. “We meet sooner than we had
217

Marie-Louise von Franz

expected,” he says. “What a strange chance that just
you should be the husband of the friend of my
youth!”
“I don’t believe in chance,” answers Melchior,
returning von Späts glance. “In one way or another
we bring about chance.”
It occurs to him that although that is a very banal
way of talking, at this moment it occurs to him that it
has a real and definite meaning known only to him
and von Spät.
Just then Trumpelsteg comes along and, having
heard the last words, says, “Hurrah for philosophy!”
He speaks so loudly that everyone becomes silent
and listens.
“Chance! Chance!” he goes on. “Naturally there is
no such thing as a chance for a magician like yourself.
One makes a chance! Mr. von Spät directs a whole
orchestra of ghosts!” And he laughs again.
Then Mr. Silverharness, the parson, with his goggle
eyes, who comes to study the disorientation of the
modern soul, says, “Yes, Mr. von Spät convinces us of
all the things you have spoken of. Don’t only talk! We
are all enlightened present-day people, and we only
submit to facts! Facts, Mr. Von Spät!”
In a chorus all the others scream out, “Yes, facts!”
“Facts! says Schulze, the school professor, joining
in. “Only facts convince us; we believe only in facts,
as the great time in which we live has taught us!”
“Bravo!” shouts the chorus.
Trumpelsteg, no longer able to contain himself,
jumps onto the table, and waving his apelike arms,
shouts, “But the arts, ladies and gentlemen, you
forget the arts!” He then makes a long peroration and
ends up saying that they do not want facts. “Facts are
mean. What we want is illusion! Let us be Knights of
the Spirit!” (In the sense of illusion which takes us
away from reality.)
Everbody echoes, “Let’s be Knights of Illusion!”
and claps. Even Sophie, who was standing silently in
the corner, begins to get excited and smacks her
218

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

naked thighs and joins in the general laughter.
Melchior and Mr. Von Spät look at each other
smiling. Melchior feels as if separated from the whole
scene by a thin veil. The shrieks and all the noise
don’t seem so loud; everything seems farther off,
more peculiar and stranger. Only to Mr. von Spät
does he feel himself near and closely connected.
In the next chapter things begin to calm down and
people sober up a little, but then the atmosphere
begins to get tense and people start whispering to
each other. Mr. von Spät leaves the room to return in
a little while, opening the door and coming out
slowly with his eyes half shut and surrounded by a
bluish shimmering mist, out of which a white head
appears. In one hand he holds a little bottle and in the
other a shining knife. He seems to notice nobody and
with stiff dancing steps goes up the two steps leading
to the opposite corner, and the unfriendly looks
which had hitherto fallen on Melchior are now
directed onto him.
As he passes them, Trumpelsteg, the art critic, and
Mrs. Cux the dancer, who had made signs to each
other, move out of the group and, holding something
in their hands, move cautiously after him. Mr. von
Spät meanwhile reaches the window, places his bottle
beside him, and turns around, his white face looking
like a sleepwalker’s.
Suddenly in Trumpelsteg’s hand appears a
revolver, and hoarse with anger, stutters, “Stop! Stop!
You mean to kill us all! It’s not a joke any longer!”
Quickly Mr. von Spät holds down his own first
finger over the bottle and lets a drop of blood fall in.
In the same moment Trumpelsteg, small as a thumb,
sits in the glass prison.
Mrs. Cux, horrified, springs von Spät to knife him.
But that latter again quickly holds his first finger over
the bottle, makes a cut with his knife, and lets a
further drop of blood. Immediately Mrs. Cux is
transformed and in the bottle.
At first everybody is dumb with astonishment, but
219

Marie-Louise von Franz

then comes shouts of laughter from all except
professor Cux who, bellowing like a wounded
animal, yells, “Give me back my wife or I’ll fetch the
police!” But he doesn’t dare go near Mr. von Splät.
“Police! Police!” cry the others. “Where’s the
telephone?”
But professor Schulze, the schoolmaster, runs from
one group to another whispering, “For God’s sake,
don’t irritate him! He could put us all in the bottle,
even the police, and what would we do then? Then
we would be lost! Keep quiet!”
Petrified with horror, nobody knows what to do,
but Sophie creeps around to her husband and, taking
his hand, begs him to ask von Spät to free the
prisoners. She tries to keep back her tears and says,
“Why must I bear all this? What do you want of me,
Melchior?”
Melchior doesn’t even look at her and only
answers, “What do I want of you? Nothing! You
made your decision long ago. We have nothing more
to do with each other.” Sophie drops to the floor,
wringing her hands.
Then the parson, Mr. Silverharness, starts, “Dear
Brethren in Christ, this is the judgement of God. We
in our pride doubted His almighty power, and now
we are punished. Let us fall on our knees, and
perhaps in His impenetrable goodness He will free us
from the coils of Satan. Lets us pray!”
They all kneel down, but Mr. von Spät picks up the
little bottle from the table and holds it up. Coming to
look, they can all see how Trumpelsteg, completely
naked, is beginning to get very fresh with Mrs. Cux in
the bottle and how the two dance round and round,
ever closer, until they last sink together in a
passionate embrace.
When the parson sees this, the prayer sticks in his
throat and his eyes nearly fall out of his head.
Everybody presses around Mr. von Spät to see what
is happening in the bottle. Then some begin to laugh
gently, and in a few minutes uncontrollable laughter
220

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

breaks out and they fall into each other’s arms, kiss,
dance, exhausted with laughter, look once more at the
unconcerned loving couple in the bottle and burst out
afresh.
Only Professor Cux is in a white-hot rage and
wants to attack Mr. Von Spät, but the others hold him
back, and then tie him to an armchair with a rope so
that he can’t move. Mr. von Spät places the little
bottle on the table and claps his hands. A white mist
forms in the room, and seven white-clad maidens
appear and bow before him. Out of the ground comes
the sound of dance music. Mr. von Spät seizes the
hand of one of the girls and now for the first time
opens his eyes, from which there comes a silver glow.
When his eyes are wide open, he stands there,
sevenfold, dancing with each of the maidens. When
the dance is over, he shuts his eyes and is once more
one person.
Afterward, a great door in the wall of the room
opens silently, and in the next room there stands a
table covered with food and drink, and everybody is
invited by a voice, which seems familiar to Melchior,
telling them to come and eat.
In the doorway stands the old apple-woman of the
station, throwing apples to the guests.
Laughing and talking, the naked women pair with
the men. Sophie has slipped over bedside Melchior,
and Mr. von Spät is with one of the white maidens,
and Professor Cux is forgotten. Wonderful dainties
and wine cover the table, and the old apple woman
goes from one to the other serving the guests. As she
pours wine into Melchior’s glass, she whispers, “You
were a clever boy to know me at once, but you are
not clever enough. Be careful! I wish you well, but
you must be obedient!”
“Of whom should I be aware?” asks Melchior
softly.
“You must know that yourself,” whispers the old
woman. “I cant say a thing!”
Melchior takes her wrist and says he won’t let her
221

Marie-Louise von Franz

go, she must tell him more—she must tell him
everything. But the old woman pulls away with
unexpected strength and says,

Ring on the finger,
Faces at the window,
Ways cross,
Winds blow southwards.
Soon it will be time,
They’re waiting! They’re waiting!
Melchior silently repeats it all to himself, and then a
great longing and restlessness surges through him.
His throat feels tight through the tears he is holding
back. He manages to control himself and looks round
at the other guests, but nobody has noticed except
Sophie, who overheard and looks at him sadly,
thinking he will leave her.
The seven girls sit there with their eyes shut as
though they have fallen into a sweet sleep. Mr. von
Spät also has his eyes shut; his head seems lifeless
and made of stone. Melchior looks around excitedly
and thinks, “Why do I hate him and love him? Why
do the boys run away from him? What is his power?
What made him make such a demonstration of his
power to these people? Did he want to tell me what I
already know? Long ago I overcame these people.
Another company calls me. Why do I hesitate? The
stranger keeps me bound. What does he want of
me?” His glance falls on the window and he sees Fo’s
face. For a minute it is there, and then disappears
again.
The other guests are still eating. Mr. von Spät
opens his eyes and immediately he is sevenfold,
sitting beside all the seven girls at the same time.
Suddenly Professor Schulze, the schoolmaster, pushes
back his chair, and tapping on his glass begins to
speak: “Ladies and gentlemen, even the most
222

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

amazing miracles seem quite natural when one has
grown used to them. Today, for a minute, we were
shaken by such unusual things which seemed like
miracles to us, but now, think of it, there is imaginary
food, people, wine, and so on, and we feel quite at
home with it all! There are no miracles. There are only
facts, and facts in themselves are always reasonable,
so we don’t need to get excited any more. Ladies and
gentlemen, we can just remain ourselves, what we
always were. Let us raise our glasses and…”
A terrible shriek interrupts him. The seven forms
of Mr. von Spät moan and shut their eyes. The seven
girls dissolve into mist. Mr. von Spät lies in his usual
form unconscious on the ground.
Fo appears standing in the window corner and
laughs. Mr. von Spät lies twisting in pain. His blue
eyes stare blindly up. His whole body seems wracked
with unbearable agony.
“D’you feel it now! D’you feel it now?” yells Fo.
“You overdid it. You wanted to rest for a minute and
play, eh? For a minute your power slept. D’you see
now that you can never sleep? Now we are the
masters!”
He dances around von Spät with great bounds. His
body is lit up. His hair is a dark flame. Quicker and
quicker he encircles von Spät with ringing cries.
Melchior looks at the face of the man lying on the
floor. Horror and love battle within him. Almost
unconsciously he wants to throw himself at Fo and
tell him to stop, but Fo whirls, glowing, to the
window.
“Take him away, Melchior!” he cries. “We are in
your debt. We give him to you! He is yours!” He
laughs once more, uncontrollably. Then looking at
Melchior, he says softly and urgently, “Melchior,
we’re waiting for you!” And he disappears.
Gradually Mr. von Spät’s pain lessens. He begins
to breathe more quietly and seems to be asleep. The
blue mist has gone, and he lies naked on the floor.
Melchior looks at his beautiful body for a minute, and
223

Marie-Louise von Franz

before the others can approach, he snatches a cloth
from the table and throws it over the sleeping man.
Then he carries him to the couch in his study. He
pushes his chair to the head of the couch and sits
down, watching the still body. Sleep has removed the
tension from the face and now Melchior sees the real
features which had hitherto been hidden from him by
the ever-changing expression. It is the face of a
beautiful god, just slightly distorted. After a few
minutes the features begin to tense again and a
movement goes through the body. The sleeper
making an immense effort, opens his eyes, which are
almost colorless and seem not to see anything. After a
bit he sits up and noticing Melchior, lets himself fall
back onto the cushions, and says hoarsely, “I came
too late. I warned you too late. Fo is free again. You
believe me to be your worst enemy. I came to your
house to take the ring away, but sleep overcame me.
Why did you protect me?”
“The sleeper was not my enemy,” answers
Melchior. “I realized that you were my brother.”
Mr. von Spät shoots up and cries, “I shall never
sleep again!”
“Never sleep again?” askes Melchior, concerned.
“What am I to understand by that? You cannot mean
that literally!”
“I shall never sleep again,” answers Mr. von Spät
and his eyes open wide and become darker. “When I
sleep, my enemies tear me to pieces. Everywhere
sleep lies in wait for me. I played for a minute, and
for the last time he overpowered me. But I am his
master. Our body is not of earth. Our body is music, a
mirroring of the stars.”
Melchior lets his head sink and says gently, “I love
the earth. I don’t want to be a master. I want to give
myself.”
Mr. von Spät moves impatiently. “You speak like
the boys,” he says angrily.
“Who are the boys?” asks Melchior quickly. “Who
is Fo?”
224

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

Mr. von Spät hesitates and at last, almost
unwillingly, says, “Nobody knows, nobody knows
their true form. They approach you as wandering
boys, as fleeting girls, as animals. They lure you away
into chaos and darkness. Somewhere they have a
kingdom, the entrance to which I cannot find (the
title of the book—The Kingdom Without Space), but
they are never there. They are always here. Perhaps
they are here and there at the same time. They seduce
everybody into an ecstatic dance. I must discover the
way. I must destroy their kingdom. The free
unbridled people must be brought into my service.
They must all be mine. Fo has escaped me, the freest,
the strongest, the boldest of them all. No darkness
must surround them, no night, no refuge. They must
no more change, must not be transformed from one
form into another. All around there must be light.
Their wild love must die. They must be driven from
the source of sleep. Nobody may sleep anymore!”
He has got up. His body seems transparent. One
can only see the gleaming outline. As he raises his
face, the ceiling of the room disappears, and out of
the darkness comes a face resembling his, looking
down and dimly lit. “Who are you? Who are you?”
cries Melchior, trembling. Mr. von Spät’s form rises to
an immeasurable height, becoming more and more
misty. Melchior’s blood feels turned to ice, but he
cannot turn away.
“Choose, Melchior!” cries Mr. von Spät, and his
voice is like the distant ringing of glass bells. “If you
want to join the boys, you only need to call and they
will forget everything—what you were and what you
are. If you want to come to us, just knock on the wall
of this room and a door will open to you; a way will
open to you to mastery in light. Think it over. The
way to us is full of danger. You must have to go
through the horrors of the world. You are still free.
When you have chosen, you will have made the
decision for yourself. A return will mean destruction.
We shall not protect you.”
225

Marie-Louise von Franz

As he speaks, Mr. von Spät’s form dissolves
completely. The ceiling closes, the lamps burn again,
the couch is empty. Melchior finds himself alone in
his room.
The discussion between Melchior and Sophie shows that their
marriage is past repair: there is a complete split between the two; they
do not understand and do not love each other any more. Obviously a
terrific bitterness of disappointed love has piled up in Sophie, who
feels that Melchior never takes part in her world and had never loved
her. Like so many women who feel unloved, in their bitterness she has
sold herself completely to the animus. Instead of relating to Melchior,
she tries to play tricks on him. For instance, in order to force him to
join her parties she does not have his room heated. She tries to catch
and overcome him with tricks, and therefore love has turned into a
fight for power. Eros has disappeared from their relationship. She also
hates her husband because of his spirital searching and the fact that he
is not at one with the bourgeois world but suffers restlessly from
conflict and yearning, which upsets her need for peace and security.
She wants to be the Professor’s wife, to have a nice circle around her
and to play a certain role in it. He, as she complains, destroys the
security of the world she wants to build. Therefore, they argue about
security or insecurity. She accuses him of making everything insecure,
of dissolving everything. And he, on the contrary, tries to show that the
security of this bourgeois world is not real security, that the only
people who can give themselves to the irrational adventures of life
have genuine security. But the talk gets them nowhere, and so they
break off their discussion and join the party.
It also turns out that Mr. von Spät has appeared and that he was a
friend of Sophie’s in her youth, and had then disappeared. Last time,
you will remember, we tried to describe Mr. von Spät as the fatherspirit, the spirit of tradition, which always comes from the paternal
world. For a man, the father-figure represents cultural tradition. Von
Spät therefore personifies cultural tradition. It is that which is opposed
to renewal; it is, as I tried to make clear to you, knowledge with its
poisonous “We know it all.” Every cultural condition contains a secret
poison which consists of the pretension of knowing all the answers. On
a primitive level, you see this in the initiation of young men when the
old men of the tribe tell them the history of the universe, how the
world was made, the origin of evil, of life after death, the purpose of
life, and so on. On this level, for instance, all such questions are
226

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

answered by the mythological tribal or religious knowledge conveyed
by the old to the young, and on that level, with the exception perhaps
of a few creative personalities, this is just swallowed wholesale. From
then on, the young men know everything too; everything is settled, all
questions are answered, so that if a missionary comes and tries to talk
to these people, he is just informed how things are: “Oh yes, we know,
the world was made in such a way; evil comes from this and that; the
purpose of life is so and so.” We do exactly the same thing, except that
in our case it is a bit more complex; basically, however, it is the same.
Mr. von Spät represents the archetypal principle of handed-down
traditional knowledge, and this contends eternally with the principle
of the puer aeternus—the spirit of creating everything anew, again and
again. Sophie Lindenhuis is secretly linked up with von Spät, who
turns out to be the boyfriend of her youth. Seen from the standpoint of
her psychology, he would therefore represent the father-animus. The
pretension of knowing all the answers is exactly what the fatheranimus produces in a woman: the assumption that everything is selfevident—the illusion of knowing it all. This attitude is what Jung is
attacking when he speaks negatively about the animus: “Everyone
does that, everybody knows this”—the absolute conviction with which
women hand out “wisdom.” When one examines it closely, however,
one sees that they have just picked up what the father (or someone
else) said, without assimilating it themselves. The daughter tends just
to reproduce the knowledge—knowledge not worked on by the
woman’s individual consciousness and not assimilated—is dangerous
and tends to be demonic.
It is also clear that von Spät’s outstanding characteristic is a
tremendous power-complex. Sophie says that even as a child he
suffocated all creativity and that the children had to play the way he
wanted. The basis of von Spät is power, and power, in a wider sense,
corresponds to the instinct of the self-preservation of the individual.
On the level of animals you can say that there are two basic, natural
tendencies which, to a certain extent, contradict each other: the sexual
drive with all its functions, including, for women, the bearing of
children and rearing of the young, and the drive toward selfpreservation. These two drives are opposite in as much as procreation,
birth and nurturing the young and all mean the death of the old
generation. There are many animals among which the male dies after
propagation has taken place. Or, for example, there are the spiders
where after the male has impregnated the female he is eaten by her.
227

Marie-Louise von Franz

Having fulfilled his function, he is no longer useful except in helping
to feed the young by being eaten by the mother. That is an extreme
case, but frequently older animals completely exhaust themselves for
the sake of their young, even to the point of destruction. As hunters we
well know, the sexual drive causes animals to forget self-protection
entirely. They become blind to danger, and a roebuck pursuing a hind
may run into a man. If a buck is in that state, the hunter must hide
behind a tree, for the shyest animal will be oblivious of his own
security when sex is the important thing. Sex means preservation of
the species, and therefore the preservation of the individual is
completely, or to a great extent, sacrificed to it. It is the species that is
important—life must go on. In the unusual state, when sexuality is not
constellated, then the drive to self-preservation (which takes the form
of either fighting or running away) is uppermost. The animal is
occupied by eating and by keeping away from death—that is, by
keeping alive as an individual.
These two drives, sex and self-preservation, are basic tendencies in
animal life. In humans they appear as two divine and contradictory
forces, namely, love and power—love including sexuality, and power
including self-preservation. Eros and power, therefore, as Jung always
points out, are opposed to each other. You cannot have them together;
they exclude each other. The marriage of Melchior to Sophie, for
instance, was switched into a power game in which each tries to save
his or her own world against the dangerous world of the other. The
possibility of giving oneself, the generosity of letting the other’s world
penetrate one’s own, is lost. Both partners fight for their lives against
each other and do not love each other anymore. It is therefore natural
that since the wife has lost the capacity for love, she falls into the
power-drive and for von Spät. That is the back door for which he gets
into the house, but von Spät is just as much the power-drive of
Melchior himself. How does the power-drive react toward eros?
Answer: By ridiculing and exposing it.
Yes, in the bottle! And what is the bottle? He puts it in a bottle and
then ridicules and exposes it, a classic way in which the power-drive
deals with love: he imprisons it! People imprison love and sex by
behaving as though they were the owners. That would be the woman
who uses her beauty and charm to catch a rich husband. That means
she does not love him; she uses love, or what is supposed to be love, to
make a career, to catch a rich husband, or whatever she may want. She
behaves as if she were the owner, and she directs it. A woman who had
228

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

fallen for Mr. von Spät would repress any spontaneous feeling of love.
If she noticed that she was falling in love with a chimney-sweep, she
would repress her feeling in statu nascendi (nip it in the bud) because it
would not suit her to love a social nobody. On the other hand, she
would deceive herself into believing that she loved the great Mr. X
who had a lot of money. She would try to convince herself that she
loved a man who would fit in with her ego and power plans, and any
kind of spontaneous eruption of eros would be repressed. So love
degenerates into its most basic fact, namely sexuality. It is reduced to
its prima materia, so to speak, to physical sexuality, which is imprisoned
in intellectual planning. Sexuality is used as a hook to catch a suitable
partner for suitable reasons, and all real love, which gradually
dissolves the fetters and boundary lines and creates new life situations,
is anxiously repressed.
Question: Isn’t it important that it is a bottle rather than a box, or some
other prison?
Yes, what is a glass bottle?
Answer: It could be used as a retort or something like that.
Yes, naturally. The whole thing reminds one of the alchemical retort
in which, actually, the naked couple is together, but with a quite
different meaning. Here, obviously, it is misused: it is a kind of cynical
abuse of the alchemical mystery.
Remark: It is the “nothing but” attitude.
Yes, it is using an idea, or an intellectual system, with a “nothing
but” nuance: it is “nothing but sexual liberty,” or “nothing but the
body,” or “nothing but me with Mr. So-and-so,” thereby excluding any
of the mystery of emotion. It can be said that in general, glass is a
substance which can be seen through but is a very bad conductor of
warmth. One could say that it has to do with the intellect, that it
represents a system which makes one able to see through something
but which cuts off the feeling relationship. For instance, if Snow White
is imprisoned in a glass coffin, she is not totally shut off from life as if
in a wood or stone coffin. She is shut off from life as far as feeling, but
not awareness, is concerned. If you are in a glass house, you can see
and be aware of everything that goes on outside, but you are cut off
from the smells, the temperature, the wind and so on. All such
perceptions are excluded, and therefore the feeling relationship to the
outer world or to the inner world. It is interesting that we put some
animals in the zoo in glass cages, thus avoiding all of the reality-impact
with danger; then from an intellectual distance we can study their
229

Marie-Louise von Franz

behavior.
In alchemy, as you know, the glass retort is even regarded as being
identical with the Philosophers’ Stone. The vessel is the feminine
aspect of the Philosophers’ Stone, which is the masculine aspect of the
Self, but both are the same thing. In the present story, the glass is a
mystical factor, which is now in the hands of Mr. von Spät. What
would that mean practically? What is the difference, psychologically,
between the glass as a positive alchemical symbol and this mock
alchemical vessel? The subtle difference can be discovered by first
considering what the alchemical retort is in its positive form. What
would that mean, putting everything into a retort?
Answer: Accepting the suffering of it.
That is a part of it, but what does the retort represent
psychologically? Most of you have read Jung’s Psychology and Alchemy.
What does it mean if I have everything in the retort?
Answer: A transformation takes place.
Yes, the retort is a place of transformation, and what is the
precondition for any kind of psychological transformation? Looking at
oneself, looking completely within. It means that instead of looking at
the outer facts, at other people, I only look at my own psyche. That
would be putting it into glass. Suppose I am angry with somebody; if I
turn away from that person and say, “Now let me look at my anger
and what that means, and what is behind it,” that would be putting
my anger into the retort. So the retort represents an attitude that aims
at self-knowledge—an attempt to become conscious of oneself instead
of looking at other people. As far as the will is concerned, it requires
determination, and as far as intellectual activities are concerned, it
means introversion, the search for inner self-knowledge at all costs,
and objectively, not subjectively, musing about one’s problems, making
the effort to really see oneself. Nobody can find this attitude except by
what one could call an act of grace.
For instance, if somebody is either madly in love, or madly angry
over some problem, perhaps a money problem, one always tries to get
the person for once to look away from that particular question,
whatever it may be, and just for a minute try to be objective, to look at
the dream—see how it looks from within, from the objective psyche—
using the dream life as a mirror for the objective psychological
situation. Again and again, unless something like a miraculous turn
takes place, people cannot do that even if they want to. They begin
again, “Yes, but you see tomorrow I have to decide to work with my
230

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

banker; I have either to sell the stock or not.” Yes, but let’s turn away,
let’s look for a minute at the objective side, at what the objective
psyche has to say about it! “No, you see I have to decide!” And then it
is like a miracle if that person suddenly becomes quiet and objective
and makes that turn and looks inside and says, “I will just abstain from
looking at the whole situation and abstain from the emotions which
flow toward it and try to be objective.”
That is a miracle, and it needs the intervention of the Self; something
must happen in the person for him to be able to do it. One knows it
oneself, for sometimes one wants to find that attitude again and
cannot; one is pushed away from from self-knowledge and can’t do it,
and then suddenly this strange peace comes up within, generally when
one has suffered enough. Then one becomes quiet and silent, and the
ego turns to look at the facts within, objectively, and stops the monkeydance of thinking about the situation. The monkey-dance of ego selfassurance stops, and a kind of objectivity comes over the person. Then
it is possible to look at oneself and be open to the experience of the
unconscious.
It can therefore be said that in a way the alchemical vessel is a
mysterious event in the psyche. It is an occurrence—something which
takes place suddenly and which enables people to look at themselves
objectively, using dreams and other products of the unconscious as
mirrors in which one can see oneself. Otherwise one has no
Archimedean point outside the ego by which to do it. That is why an
awareness of the Self is necessary before one can look at oneself, and
that is why very often people are touched in the beginning of the
analysis by experience of the Self. Only that enables them afterwards to
strive toward looking at themselves in this objective way. That is what
the alchemists meant by the vessel. It could also be said that the vessel
symbolizes an attitude which is, for example, the prerequisite for doing
active imagination, for that you cannot do except with the vessel. You
can call active imagination itself a sort of vessel, for if I sit down and
try to objectify my psychological situation in active imagination, that
would be having it in a vessel, which presupposes again this attitude
of ethical detachment, honesty and objectivity, which is necessary in
order to be able to look at oneself. That would be the vessel in a
positive form. If with my ego I judge the unconscious, I put it in a
vessel too, but then it is the glass prison, the “nothing but" attitude,
which gives that prison a negative aspect. Then it is an intellectual
system, and the living phenomenon of the psyche is always
231

Marie-Louise von Franz

imprisoned in any kind of intellectual system. The owner of its power.
This is very subtle. There are people willing to look at themselves,
but only in order to be stronger than the other person or to master a
situation. They still retain an ego-power purpose, and they even use
the techniques of Jungian psychology––Active imagination, for
instance––but with their eyes fixed on power, on overcoming the
difficulty, on being the big stag who did it. That gives it the wrong
twist; nothing comes out of it. Or there are others who work for a
certain time honestly analyzing themselves–– but in order to become
analysts and have power over others. That is another snare of the same
kind: looking at oneself only in order to exercise power over others;
looking within not for its own sake––not just because one has the need
to become more conscious. Thus Powers sneaks into everything again
and again, and turns that which has been a living spiritual
manifestation into a trick, a technical trick in the possession of the ego.
Mr. von Spät is the demon of misusing everything, of making
everything––even the highest spiritual powers––degenerate into such a
technical trick.
I have been asked several questions. One of them is this: assuming
that von Spät represents the misuse of intellect with the shade of
“nothing but” domination, then what about the miracles he
performed? How would you interpret that? How can such an attitude
produce such miracles?
Question: wouldn't the word “trick“ be better than miracle?
Yes, one could also collect a collective hallucination trick. Someone
goes into a trance, and then a collective hallucination takes place,
which vanishes when suddenly they all wake up in the dinner and
everything else has disappeared. It was a trick of illusion, but how
does that connect with the meaning we have so far established? If we
look at Mr. von Spät as being Sophie's animus, then he would be a
father–animus image. And how does a father-animus in a woman
produce not only opinions but also magic tricks?
I am reminded of the case of a woman who had a schizoid father, a
rather cold sadistic man who perpetually criticized his children,
constantly telling them that they were nobodies and would never get
anywhere. If they tried in school he said that they would never
succeed, or if they wanted to take up art, he told them that they had no
talent and would not make a success of it. There was always a negative
attitude. He also had the habit, which drove the daughters mad, of
cutting off the heads of flowers with a stick when they walked along in
232

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

the fields. It was a tic nerveaux (nervous habit) and was done in
revenge, or out of bitterness over his own disappointed and destroyed
feeling life. There is an inherited schizophrenia of many generations in
this family, and here the father cut off his children's heads by
discouraging remarks, or he tried to do so, so that they should not
grow up. Now this daughter had a series of lovers––old men, young
men, artists, businessmen––apparently all kinds of different people,
but always, when she had known them for more than a fortnight, they
would start to torture her in a sadistic way by telling her that she was
nobody and was disgusting, would never get anywhere, that all she
said was stupid, that her art would never lead her anywhere. It was
exactly her fathers gramophone–record kind of talk. I have never
found out whether she made them do it, or if by some divination of
instinct she always picked such men. Most of them I never got to know
except through what she said about them, but you can say that it was
like black magic.
In primitive language I would say that there was a curse on that girl,
that she was compelled to choose critical, unloving sadistic men who
trampled on her feelings, which were already nearly destroyed
anyway. In the dreams it appeared that it was really the father. For
instance, the night after one such quarrel with a lover who told her that
she was no good and everything was wrong with her, and so on, she
dreamt that her father always waited for her and beat her on the
shinbone with a stick so that she should fall down. It is a well-known
fact that the father-animus, or the mother-demon in a man, does not
only act as an inner wrong fate, a distortion of the instincts in the
choice of the partner and all these other things, but also is really like an
outer fate, and can appear in synchronistic miracles outside the
personal life, in events for which we cannot make individuals
responsible. I think it would be the wrong feeling-nuance to tell such a
girl that she always fell for sadistic lovers because she had not
overcome the sadistic father-animus within her. There is quite a bit of
truth in that, but it is not the whole truth. Later, when she is further
along, one may encourage her to see that she has such a father-demon
and sadist within her and that it attracts sadistic men. Sometimes,
however, when one tries to deal with such a dark fate, one feels that
one is up against a divine destructive power, so much that one cannot
make the individual responsible.
Question: Couldn’t you say that she always had that thought in her head,
and then it became part of herself? To get those people into the bottle von Spät
233

Marie-Louise von Franz

always had to give a drop of blood, and it seems to me that the animus in a
woman—that is the thought in her head—gets right into her blood and
actually becomes a part of her. Von Spät gave his blood; he gave the whole of
himself in making those tricks.
Yes, von Spät is naturally the secret thought-demon in a woman.
Remark: But he also gave his blood.
This is quite right, but there we have to go another factor, namely,
that when von Spät performs this magic he becomes untrue to himself,
which is why Fo catches him. It is very important to remember that if
von Spät hadn’t performed this trick, if he hadn't started to display
magic, Fo would have not overcome him.”I’ll never sleep again,” Mr.
von Spät said after having been overcome by Fo. “When I sleep, my
enemies get me; always sleep lies in wait for me. I played.” So you see
you became untrue to himself because for the minute he played: he
forgot his power–drive; he became amused in the magical
performance. For a moment he behaved like the Fo-band, like the boys.
He played––“and there he got me for the last time, but I am his master.
Our body is not earth, our body is music, mirroring the stars.” It is a
true enantiodromia, and we must take Mr. von Spät as the spirit of
intellectualism—thought-power—powerful only as long as he does not
play. When he begins to produce magic, he begins to turn toward the
Fo-principle. If you look at it as though there were two poles, one pole
would be Fo and the other von Spät. When von Spät is at his best and
is himself, then he is awake; he does not sleep, he does not play, and he
does not perform magic tricks. Be he got drunk off his power, and
displayed it more and more; he produced magic stuff to show off, and
slowly, as he says, forgot himself. He went to sleep—played. And then
Fo got him! You could just as well say that he fell into Fo, for these two
powers always fall into each other through an enantiodromia, as do all
unconscious opposites. Both are unconscious opposites because they
are gods, which means basic archetypal drives in the psyche.
It is a play of opposites in which Melchior is the suffering human, in
the middle of the two, for von Spät and Fo both want his soul. When
von Spät goes too far in his power-play, he snaps into Fo, and you will
see that when Fo goes too far into his other play; he snaps round into
von Spät. So when von Spät begins to perform magic by cutting
himself and using his blood, he is really leaning toward the Fo side; he
is switching over into the other. Secretly they are linked. You could say
that they were two aspects of life, for both belong to life and you
cannot live without the other. But each claims to be the only one,
234

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

making a total claim on the human being. Fo asks Melchior to give
himself totally to him, and von Spät asks the same thing. As we shall
see at the end of the book, is that Melchior cannot hold his own
standpoint. Seen from the personal angle, this is the weakness of ego,
which is switched around between the opposites and is their
plaything. He is between two gods or demons who both claim to be his
unique owner, and what he cannot do is to keep his feet on the ground
and say, “I will not obey either of you, but will live my human life.”
And that is why he is caught up in this constant demonic play.
Miss Rump has discovered something very interesting about the
word “Fo,” namely, that its dominant meaning is Buddha; it is one of
his designations. This makes sense because it is said that Melchior had
traveled in China and India, and Fo is the ruler of an invisible
kingdom, which would be Nirvana, as we shall see later. The
decoration of the book cover is on one side something like a Japanese
torii, which has a mystical meaning in the East—the door through
which you go into the Beyond—and at the back of the book there is an
eightfold star. These two designs are probably chosen consciously.
Obviously the author had read and was fascinated by Eastern Material,
as will become much more evident later, and he projects the puer
aeternus—the creative-demon and eros demon—into the East. So von
Spät, on the other hand, represents late Christianity. Christian
civilization is now old and worn out for us. It has lost the powerful
élan vital that it had in the first centuries of its rising. We, the tired
Western civilization, pretend that we know all the answers, but we are
longing for a new genuine inner experience and are, to a great extent,
turning to the East, expecting a renewal from there. (But this is
obviously a projection.) That would be another aspect of von Spät,
whose slightly morbid face suggests a beautiful divine image, slightly
oblong and sickly. Which god looks like that in our civilization? Christ.
So here is a hint that von Spät is not Christ but the image we have of
him—a suffering, dying god—something divine, but no longer capable
of living.
Much of the book at this point does not need any comment. There is
the journalist who just talks any kind of rot he thinks fitting at the
moment and the parson who pretends that he is studying the
disorientation of modern life and then in the midst of his prayer just
stops to stare at the sexual intercourse. The irony in all these things is
transparent and comes out of the conscious layers of the author.
Therefore no further psychological interpretation is needed.
235

Marie-Louise von Franz

But the still unsolved problem is the role of the feminine. Women are
described with the utmost scorn. There is not a single positive feminine
figure in the book. The author ridicules them completely. Whether he is
a homosexual or not I do not know, but he certainly displays the
psychology of homosexuality. This may be due, however, to the
genreal German attitude which, even in heterosexual men, is colored
by a strong homosexual bias. There is no eros in the book, and the only
positive woman in the chapters we have read is the apple-woman, who
is a positive mother-figure. She brings a message to Melchior when
von Spät’s power is at its height. When everybody is fascinated by his
magic, the apple-woman comes to the dinner party and whispers to
Melchior, “Ring on the finger (the ring signified betrothal, so to speak,
with the boy), faces at the window, ways which cross each, winds
blowing southwards, soon the time will come, they’re waiting, they’re
waiting”—meaning that they are waiting for him. The message she
transmits to Melchior is that he should not become untrue and disloyal
to them. She is only the feminine figure on the side of the boys, and
this makes a cluster which consists of a group of mother-bound boys
whose feminine ruler is archetypal mother nature and, at the same
time, is the fat old woman who sells apples at the station.
That there is no young anima figure is typical of the German
mentality. As Jung points out, on the other side of the Rhine the anima
has not been differentiated but has remained completely within the
mother complex. A man belonging to the Secret Service told me that
when he wanted to loosen up young Nazi prisoners so as to get
military information out of them, the leading—and practically always
successful—question to put when they were determined not to tell the
enemy was (with a slightly sentimental quiver in the voice), “Is your
mother still alive?” Usually they then started to cry, and their tongues
loosened. He discovered that this was the key question with which to
penetrate the armor of the hostile attitude in German youths. Naturally
generalizations must be taken as such; they are only half-truths in
individual cases, but if we may characterize national differences, there
is still a lack of differentiation of the anima in Germans compared with
the more Latin-influenced peoples. Germany itself also differs in the
south, where there was Roman occupation. In the center of Germany
the attitude is slightly different from that of the northern part, so the
statement has to be taken with a grain of salt. This novel, however,
shows clearly the state of complete undifferentiation of the anima, the
only positive woman being this apple-mother.
236

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

Sophia means wisdom, and it is meaningful that Melchior’s wife’s
name is Sophie. But she appears as a bitter, animus-possessed, socially
ambitious, petty, unloving woman, the typical disappointed wife.
Nevertheless, her name means wisdom, which shows how greatly the
unloving attitude of the man has altered the feminine principle. Sophie
could be Wisdom; she could incarnate the love of humanity—she
could be all that the name Sophia implies—but instead she is changed
into this destructive small figure because Melchior has not known how
to turn toward her and make her blossom with this love. She is
negative wisdom, and she is bitter because he does not love human
beings. She likes human contacts and he hates them; she wants to force
him to make human contacts, but he remains in inhuman isolation.
This is what they fight about.
As you know, the Sophia is called philanthropos, “the one who loves
man.”18 She is an attitude of love toward mankind, which naturally
means being human among other human beings and loving them. That
is the highest form of eros. As Jung sketches it in his paper on the
transference, it is even higher than the highest love symbolized by the
Virgin Mary because, as he says, very meaningfully, “the less
sometimes means more.”19 This means that if I have an idealistic love
for mankind, wanting to do only good, that is less than just being
human among human beings.
But that kind of love is lacking at this party is which a completely
barbaric animality breaks through with its egoism, vulgarity and
untruthfulness. This shows what happens if love for the human being
is not present, and also shows what neglecting the eros side produces,
namely, a conventional surface layer of so-called spiritual civilization
and, underneath, the old animal ape-circus which may break loose at
any minute. As soon as the conventions are gone and the women have
undressed, there is just the ape-circus left, with a complete
undifferentiation of anything human. One could say that this is the
typical psychology of those schizoid intellectuals, so numerous in our
civilization, in whom the feeling function has been completely
repressed. This is what people look like when they haven’t developed
the feeling function, except that as a rule they don’t have the courage

18

See references to Sophia in Jung’s Psychology and Religion, CW 11, and in The
Practice of Psychotherapy, CW 16; also Proverbs 8:31, and Ecclesiasticus 24:19-22.
19
The Practice of Psychotherapy, CW 16, par. 361.
237

Marie-Louise von Franz

to reveal the animality lurking underneath. It takes a revolution, a
Nazi movement, or something of that sort, to bring it out into the open,
and then one is amazed at what comes out. When the conventions are
swept away, then this ape-circus appears.
Herr von Spät hates sleep. How would you interpret that? He says
that when he has completely overcome his enemies there will be no
sleep, and his way to overcome the boys will be to cut them off from
the source of sleep.
Answer: In sleep there is no power-drive.
Yes, in sleep the power-drive is knocked out. We are completely
helpless and passive, open to the whole world, naked in our
surroundings. It is a state in which power is knocked out and the
unconscious comes up, so you think that at first that he must represent
consciousness and Fo the principle of unconsciousness. But if we look
more closely, it is a bit different. Mr. von Spät is something
unconscious too, namely, the unconscious demonic aspect of
consciousness. Consciousness consists of something we think we
know; it is an immediate awareness. Even though we do not know
quite what it is, we have a subjective feeling that what consciousness is
is intimately known to us. But behind this conscious awareness lies an
unconsciousness; in other words, behind that I and the whole
phenomenon of consciousness lies the shadow, the power-drive, and
something demonic.
We must never forget that consciousness has a demonic aspect. We
begin now to be aware that the achievements of our consciousness—
our technical achievements, for example—have destructive aspects. We
are waking up to the fact that consciousness can be a disadvantage and
that it is based on an unconsciousness. That which makes me so
passionately want consciousness to dominate life is something
unconscious. And we don’t know what that is. The need, the urge and
passion for consciousness is something unconscious, as is what we
know as conscious tradition.
For example, to a primitive tribe its own tradition appears to it as
consciousness. In an African tribe, if a novice—having been tortured
and having his teeth knocked out, or whatever—is taught how the
world was created, how evil comes about, that illness means a certain
thing, that men must carry women of a certain clan for certain reasons,
that to him is consciousness. The Africans say that a man is an animal
until he has gone through an initiation whereby he assimilates the
tribal tradition. The uninitiated they call animals, which shows that
238

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

they would maintain that the acquisition of such knowledge is the step
from animal unconsciousness to human consciousness. To us, however,
who have a different tradition, the mythological teaching that the
young primitive absorbs seem purely unconscious. We even interpret
such teachings as we do dreams; that this is possible shows that what
signifies collective consciousness to a primitive tribe is in reality full of
unconscious symbolism.
I refer to other civilizations to illustrate my point because one can
observe another society sine ira et studio, that is, dispassionately. But
with our own religious tradition it is the same. We could say that
Christian teaching is a content of our collective consciousness. If we
look more closely, however, we see that it is based on symbols such as
the crucified god, the Virgin Mary and so on. If we think about these,
about what they mean and how to link them up with our actual life,
we discover that we do not know because they are full of
unconsciousness. We find that precisely those known aspects of our
spiritual tradition are completely mysterious to us in many ways and
that we can say nothing about them. So consciousness contains a secret
reverse side which is unconsciousness. Just that is the demonic thing
about von Spät, namely, that conscious views always behave as if they
were the whole answer. One might say that perhaps it is now the task
of psychology to uncover this secret, destructive aspect of
consciousness and to fight it.
I hope that we may sometime get to the point where consciousness
can function without the pretension of knowing everything and of
having said the last word. If consciousness could be reduced to a
function, a descriptive function, then people would cease to make final
statements. Instead, one would say that from the known facts it
appears at the present time as if one could explain it in such a way.
That would mean giving up the secret power premise that claims to
have said all there is to be said, so that now we know all about it and it
is so. If the false pretension could be eliminated, that would be a big
step. But that presupposes the integration of consciousness by our
becoming aware of its relativity and its specific relation to the
individual. (I must know that I know and that I have especially that
view.) It is not enough to have a conscious viewpoint; one must know
why one has it and what one’s individual reasons for having it are. The
average person is still possessed by collective consciousness and,
under its influence, talks as if he knew all the answers. For example,
people tend to regard a humanitarian attitude as being their own,
239

Marie-Louise von Franz

forgetting that it is derived from the Christian Weltanschauung. They
fail to realize that it is collective and that it is part of a Weltanschauung
they no longer share. Power is the hidden motivation behind such a
behavior.
Knowledge is one of the greatest means of asserting power. Man has
obtained power over nature and other human beings by brute force
and also by knowledge and intelligence. It is uncertain which is the
stronger, for strength and intelligence are the two aspects of the powerdrive. They account for the many primitive animal stories in which the
witty, clever one outwits the strong one: the hyena outwits the lion,
and in South America the little dwarf stag outwits even the tiger. This
shows up in the power-drive of the single individual; for instance, in
the animus of women—either they trick their husbands or they make
brutal scenes. Emotional brutality and cunning are the two
manifestations of power. When my power-drive is irritated, I either hit
the other person directly, or, if I am too cowardly or not strong enough,
then I find a way of tricking him.
Our consciousness is still secretly coupled with these two tendencies
for domination, and knowledge is generally combined with them. You
see this most irritatingly in the prestige drive of the academic world. It
is a rare event in university life that a professor is interested in truth for
his own sake; usually he is more interested in his position and in being
the first to have said something. Twenty-five years ago an
anthropologist dug up an amazing skull in Tanganyika—what
anthropologists had been searching for for years—the “missing link.”
It lies between the anthropoid ape and the human species and, as
shown by the Geiger-counter, adds about ten million years to the age
of the human race. It has thus thrown over all the former findings of
anthropology. This man published the facts about his discovery, but for
twenty-five years, with the exception of Professor Broom in America,
there was dead silence in all the universities. The discovery was
absolutely ignored. Not one professor of anthropology corresponded
with the publisher or tried to check up on the age of the skull. A
Geiger-counter could have been used and a check made, but nobody
did so for that would have meant revising their theories. They would
have to say that something said in a former lecture must now be
corrected, and academic vanity, the power-drive of the intellect, would
not permit such a thing. Now another skeleton has been dug up in
Italy, and facts are accumulating, so now, hesitatingly, here and there
an anthropologist makes tentative allusion to such a discovery, but for
240

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

twenty-five years they all sat on their power-knowledge and were not
interested in the truth.
Remark: Les savants ne son pas curieux, as the French say.
Yes, exactly! Which shows that the power which is contained in
knowledge, the demonic drive to dominate through knowledge, is
stronger than the objective interest in finding out any kind of truth.
That is only one example. There are many others.

241

Lecture 11

Last time we had reached that part of the story where von Spät
suddenly wakes up and his magic is over because, for a minute, he
slept or played, was not quite alert enough, and so the demonic boys
overcame him. You remember that, at the dinner party which he had
conjured up, von Spät had appeared with seven girls and sometimes
multiplied himself so as to be the lover of all seven. He is seven men
with seven girls, and then he is again one figure. At the moment when
he wakes up, he is shocked out of his trance by the appearance of the
boy Fo. The seven girls and the magic dinner party disappear. How
would you interpret the one magician and the seven girls.
Remark: With himself it makes eight.
Yes, but when is there one with the seven? You must remember that
the author had been interested in alchemy and had produced this
alchemical pseudo-miracle of putting Trumpelsteg and Mrs. Cux in the
bottle, a kind of mock representation of the alchemical mysterium
coniunctionis.
In alchemy, especially in the later alchemical texts, which are
probably the ones that our author knows, There are often
representations of seven women sitting in an earth cave, and they are
the seven planets or the seven metals, both representing the same
thing. The idea was that every metal corresponded to a planet: gold—
Sun, Silver––moon, copper––Venus, lead––Saturn, Iron––Mars, tin––
Jupiter, quicksilver––Mercury. The eighth figure among the seven
women would represent the ruler of them all and would be either the
sun-god or Saturn because Saturn was also represented as the old sun,
the old form of the sun. From his name (“Late”) one can also conclude
that von Spät probably represents the old sun-god surrounded by the
242

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

seven planets. We have interpreted von Spät as representing the
principal of Christianity because he appears as an aristocratic but
rather morbid–looking god, and now he appears as the old sun-god,
which would mean that it is not Christianity in itself, whatever that is,
for nobody knows, but the old tired Weltanschauung of Christianity,
that which has been realized and is therefore a habit of thought and is
no longer vital––a kind of principal at the base of our social and
religious institutions. In fairy tales, this corresponds to the old king
who has lost the water of life and who needs to be renewed or has to
be dethroned to give up the throne to a follower. In other words, the
Weltanschauung, having once again growing old, has become an aged
ruler who is sterile and needs renewal.
There is a little incident which goes further, for at the end of the
chapter I read you, Melchior asks von Spät who the boys are. Von Spät
says,
Nobody knows their real essence. They approach you
like wandering boys, like animals, like girls. They
seduce you into chaos and darkness. Somewhere they
have a kingdom but I cannot find the entrance. They
are never there. They are always here. They are in
several places at the same time. I must find the way. I
must destroy the kingdom. Those free people must be
subdued and strongest and boldest one, Fo, must
also. Their wild love must die. I will cut them off
from the well of sleep. Nobody shall sleep any more.
At that moment von Spät gets up and looks as if he were transparent.
He lifts his head, and the ceiling opens, and suddenly, from above, a
mirror–image, his double, looks down, shining. Melchior is frightened
when he sees somebody looking down who looks exactly like von Spät
and he cries out, "Who are you? Who are you?" But von Spät
disappears into a kind of cold mist, and then he calls down from far
above:
"You must choose, Melchior! If you want to go to the
boys, you need only call them and they will seduce
you into the sweet darkness, and if you choose their
way you will forget who you were and who you are.
But, if you want to come to us, you must only knock
on the wall in this room, and a door will open and the
way toward the ruling of the light will come. Now
think it over. The way toward us is full of danger, but
243

Marie-Louise von Franz

you are still free. When you have chosen you can't go
back. If you want to go back we will not spare you."
After this the figure of von Spät disappears, and
Melchior sees the lamp burning and the empty couch,
and he is alone in his room.
How would you interpret this doubling of von Spät? The rest of what
he says is more or less clear from what we said about him before, but
how would you now interpret the fact that he becomes double and
then disappears into heaven––into the sky, the firmament––like mist?
Answer: Hasn't he been living as a human? He was living a human life,
now goes off into the god.
Yes, you could say that von Spät below would be an incarnation of a
divine principle and now is again joining his eternal form. What would
that mean also for Melchior, practically, If he could draw the
conclusions from what he experiences? What does it mean if an
unconscious figure doubles in a dream?
Remark: that the dark side of God is constellated at the same time.
Not necessarily. That is not in at this point; that will come later. Here
the double is as light as von Spät. He is a kind of spirit magician.
Question: Would he be a pagan god?
Yes, that's closer! Do we, who belong to the Christian civilization,
really know at bottom what it means? What archetype is behind the
Christian civilization? Could we honestly claim that we know what we
mean when we say we believe in a Trinitarian God and in Christ? Even
the greatest theologian has never claimed to do so. Catholic
theologians, for instance, speak of the mystery of each dogma. Some
aspects could be put into words, but the nucleus is absolutely
unknown to us. We would say that there is an archetypal content or an
archetype behind it which, by definition, we do not know. One could
therefore say that von Spät is that part which has entered human
consciousness, which sounds familiar to us, and it gives us that strange
feeling of knowing what it means, of being aware and conscious of it.
And then there is a whole other half which is completely unknown to
us, and that would be his other part. One might say that only after
having realized the pagan opposite pole––which would be the world
of Fo and the pagan mother–goddess––could we become aware of the
double aspect of Christianity––its conscious and unconscious aspects.
As long as we are in it, we cannot become aware of it, for we are, as it
were, wrapped up in it; it needs an Archimedean point outside to
realize the specific nature of our own civilization. The pagan pole is
244

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

projected onto the East, for the boy Fo has a name which points to
Buddha, which means that the capacity for looking at our own cultural
and religious background is only possible for us when we get into
closer touch with other civilizations and their religions. If, with a
certain equanimity, you can accept the fact that the other person’s
religion contain some truth too, then you are able to become aware,
objectively, of the specific character of our culture.
Detached awareness such as this is, of course, a modern
development, and it has increased to such an extent that it is no longer
possible for us to get stuck in the medieval prejudice that ours is the
only true religion. Now that the world has shrunk and we are
confronted with millions of people who have other attitudes and other
beliefs, we have to ask ourselves what is specific and different in our
attitudes and in our civilization. That question introduces a certain
relativity which makes us realize how much von Spät, in some ways,
represents something we consciously know in which we attempt to
convey to others (for instance, in foreign missionary work) and how
much there is an archetypal, unknown background; namely, the eternal
aspect of von Spät, which is the image of something divine behind any
specific form in which it may appear.
In a way, you find this development very clearly in the writings of
Toynbee, who tries, with a kind of extraverted approach, to say that it
is quite clear, now that we have come into closer contact with the East
and other civilizations, that we shall simply have to adopt a kind of
mixed Religion. He proposes a new form of prayer which would begin:
opening “Oh Thou, who art Buddha, Christ, Dionysus…" we should
just pray to a savior figure to whom one would describe all those
names, in making a nice cocktail of all the essentials of all the religions,
slightly blurring the not too important differences, so as to have a kind
of generalized world religion where Buddhists and South African
Negroes, and everybody can join in and think what they like about
these contents. This is the same reaction that we have already had on a
smaller scale in the late Roman Empire. There, too, there were all those
little nations with their local creeds and folklore and religious
teaching––the Celts and the Syrians and the Israelites, and so on––and
then, when all this was put together in the Roman Empire, the Romans
tried the same thing. They said that you just had to pray to JupiterZeus-Amun, which was the highest god, and the underworld god
would be Hades-Osiris (in Egypt, Sarapis), and there you have a new
cocktail religion where even the attributes of Christ, in which he would
245

Marie-Louise von Franz

be represented as sitting in the Buddha-position, with the mudra of
pity, and somewhere the cross behind him in a decorative way. All that
is possible—human naiveté is boundless!
This attempt at relativity––the typical development of von Spät, the
late development of a tired civilization, of a worn–out and decaying
Weltanschauung––has no chance of success because the very essence of
religious experience is that it has an absolute character. If I say that my
experience could, but just as well could not, be, or that I believe such–
and–such but can't quite understand another's believing something
different, this indicates that my so–called religious experience is not
genuine, because religious experience has a compelling and absolute
character. One could say that this is the criterion of a religious
experience. If someone asserts that his experience has changed his
whole life and will now pervade everything and if it really does apply
to everything, being a total experience, applicable to every field of
activity, then you know that whatever it may seem, it is a truly
religious experience. Otherwise it is merely an intellectual experience,
or a mood, which passes away or which is kept in one drawer for
Sundays––taken out and put away again.
So we are in a terribly contradictory situation, because in order to
have a religious experience one needs some kind of absolute
obligation, yet this is irreconcilable with the reasonable fact that there
are many religions and many religious experiences and that
intolerance is really outdated and barbaric. The possible solution
would be for each individual to keep to his own experience and take it
as absolute, accepting the fact that others have different experiences,
thus relating the necessary absoluteness only to oneself––to me this is
absolute (there is no relativity and no other possibility) but I must not
extend the borders into the other person’s field. And this is what we
try to do. We try to let people keep a religious experience. And this is
what we try to do. We try to let people keep a religious experience
without collectivizing it and taking the wrong step of insisting that it
must be valid for others too. It must be absolutely valid for me, but it is
an error for me to think that the experience which is absolute for me
has to be applied to others. We shall see that this shortly becomes a
crucial point in our novel. Here, however, received that the breaking in
of a new religious experience, which is represented by Fo, makes it
possible to realize two layers of the late Weltanschauung of von Spät,
who says, "if you want to follow us (namely, him) toward the kingdom
of light, then just knock on this wall and a door will open."
246

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

The next part of the book is “The Open Door,” so we must conclude
(and we shall see soon that this is true) that at this moment of the novel
Melchior, or the author, chooses the way of von Spät and makes up his
mind to leave Fo.
Melchior meditates on what has happened, and then
he becomes very excited, just as though he heard a
bell inside him ringing, and suddenly he says, “I
must find certainty.” And he bangs with his fist on
the wall. At that moment he hear beautiful music and
sees columns appearing, and a big gate opens and he
sees the sea and the quiet waves. A great white bird
spreads its wings and approaches him, and he sees a
sailing boat coming in. But then everything becomes
disagreeably quiet and dead. He shudders and is
unable to move, and then he begins to delight in the
stiffening which has taken possession of him. After
some time the clock in his room strikes, and his
numbness disappears. Tears come from his eyes. With
widespread arms he passes through the gateway and
out into the night. After a few steps he hears voices
which he thinks are those of his wife, of Trumpelsteg,
and of Professor Cux. Dark figures appear from all
sides. A muffled, bitter voice cries, “Seize him, seize
him!” Somebody catches hold of him from behind,
and a black cloth is put over his face and he faints.
After some time he comes to and finds that he is
lying bound on the deck of a little ship and that
immoveable figures are sitting beside him. A storm
comes up and they are tossed ceaselessly on the
waves. Hours pass and no one speaks. Then a torch is
lit, and in the forepart of the ship a giant of a man
makes signals, swinging the torch above his head. In
time, answering signals come from the opposite
shore, and Melchior is relieved to be once more
approaching land. Before landing, a black veil is
again put over his face and his hands are again tied.
he tries to cry out, but cannot, and faints again. On
land he comes to and has to walk in the darkness
with others beside him. After a time they come to
pass endless passages, and sometimes he hears the
247

Marie-Louise von Franz

sound of a door. He is astonished to feel ground
under is feet, for he had the feeling of walking on air.
Someone bangs on metal. Then everything becomes
still and dark, as before. In that moment, life returns
to Melchior, and he tries to fight, but he comes up
against nothing but empty air. He is alone. Suddenly
the darkness lifts, and a blaze of light stabs his eyes.
He is in a big hall, decorated with a red velvet, and
behind a large table are enthroned three veiled people
dressed in red. Along the walls sit all the men and
women whom he has known during his lifetime.
They look at him severely, whispering among
themselves.
The next chapter is “The Judgement.”
Melchior asks who tied him up and brought him
there. But there is no answer, “I want an answer!” he
cries and bangs on the table, but a stern voice says,
“You stand right before your judges, Melchior!”
Somebody then says that the accusers should come
forward, and there is a lot of movement and
whispering and murmuring in the hall. Melchior
looks around and recognizes friends and enemies,
relatives and neighbors, comerades, and the main
servants of his own house. All their faces are gray and
covered with dust, their mouths open and black, their
lips blueish. Obviously they are all dead and have
come back from the tomb. He looks for his wife and
sees her standing in the front row, looking at him
with mad, demanding eyes. Then he sees Professor
Cux with his red beard, Trumpelsteg, and all the
others. Mrs. Cux’s beautiful legs now look like sticks.
His wife, Sophie, says, “You never wore the slippers
which I spent a whole year embroidering for you.
You never loved me.” Cux says, “You were never
interested in my chemical discoveries, but you were
always concerned with your own.” Trumpelsteg says,
“Always when I had an idea, you picked my brains
and used it yourself, and I was left empty.” And Mrs.
Cux says, “You never admired by beautiful legs and
now they have become like sticks. You were heartless
248

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

to me.”
So, one after the other, they all accuse him. Now
ghosts keep appearing around Melchior. He sees his
mother’s suffering face, his father’s face, and then an
old great-aunt turns up and says, “You always
laughed when I wanted to read you the verses out of
my album. I showed them to nobody but you, and
you laughed at them. So everything I loved died with
me.” School friends turn up, and among them he sees
Otto von Lobe (the one who committed suicide at the
beginning of the book) and Heinrich Wunderlich (the
boy who became cynical) and also Henriette Karlsen.
He wants to walk up to her and say, “Are you here
too?” But others come between them. Then the old
apple-woman is there and accuses him, saying, “He
always went away. I sat at the station. I saw it! I
know, I know!” Then they all begin to murmur in a
hostile way and the Judge says, “You have heard the
accusations. Do you admit your guilt?” Melchior
says, “Yes, I am guilty. Every step I took I did wrong.
We kill while we live, but who wants to be the
judge?”
There is silence and the Judge’s voice says, “You
deserve the death sentence. You must die.” The three
mummies get up from their thrones. But Melchior
says calmly that there is nobody there who can judge
him. He gets up from his knees and says that he does
not admit any judge. He asks who those are who
accuse him and then says that they are just crazy
shadows. The people are infuriated and say he must
die. They call two wooden figures at the entrance
who seize him. He goes through a kind of nightmare
of hell: there is fire and shut doors and doors which
open and fall on him and, so on––just as it would be
in a nightmare. In the end they take a black coat and
nail it on him so that he feels great pain from the nails
entering his flesh. They lead him on, in this hellish
walk, to a big marketplace in a little town where all
the houses are those in which he had lived during his
life, and the people standing around are those whom
249

Marie-Louise von Franz

he knew in his lifetime. He has to go up to put his
head on the block, and there is great excitement, but
just at the moment when his head should be cut off,
he looks up and sees the white bird approaching, and
that gives him courage, and he seizes the sword and
kills the executioner. A loud cry goes up from the
people, but at the same moment the sea breaks in a
great wave, bringing a horse which halts before him.
He was just time to mount and ride away before
everyone is engulfed by the sea, and he hears their
cries as they drown.
The next chapter is “The Call."
Melchior still has in his ears the sound of the cries of
the drowning people. He goes up a mountain and
finds a little river and drinks from its cold water, after
which he feels quieter and as though freed from the
nightmare. The horse has disappeared, but again he
sees a white bird and follows it. He still feels that
there is an abyss behind, which seems to be following
his every step, but it never quite reaches him. The
night is cold. Suddenly he hears a wolf barking.
How would you psychologically interpret the problem of the
judgment? You see quite clearly that from a literary standpoint this is a
judgment after death. It gives the idea, more or less, of what we think
will take place after death. The people who appeared were people who
were still living, like his wife and Mrs. Cux, who, we presume, are still
alive, but there are also a number of dead people, so the living and
dead are together, and they look like half–decayed corpses. What
would that mean? What is now approaching? What is the accusation?
This is a fatal turning point in the story, so it is very important that it
should be realized.
Answer: That he has not been related to anybody.
Yes, exactly. Now the unconscious catches up with him and the
general reproach is unrelatedness. He has not worn the slippers his
wife embroidered, he has not looked at his colleagues' work. It is
complete, cold narcissism, which from the very beginning has been
Melchior’s disease, is absolute unrelatedness. We said before that with
the lack of differentiation of the anima and without any relationship to
the feminine principle there could be no eros and no relatedness. The
essence of the whole reproach is unrelatedness, but why are they all
250

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

dead?
Answer: He did not keep them alive?
Yes, exactly. It is relatedness which gives life to things. If I am not
related to someone, it is absolutely irrelevant if that person is alive or
dead. A person to whom I am not related is as good as dead to me;
there is no difference. All the people in his surroundings are dead. It is
a whole dead world, so it can be said that they also represent his
unlived life, for having escaped into complete intellectualism, he has
not suffered in life. Going through the door is like going through the
unconscious, and the first thing which comes up is the revelation of all
the unlived life which he has not lived because he had no feeling. How
would you interpret the fact that he escapes his executioner?
Answer: It is a moment of realization and a determination to act for once.
You would evaluate it positively?
Answer: Well, he kills the executioner, doesn't he?
Yes, and do you think that is positive? What does execution by
cutting off the head mean symbolically?
Answer: He could not think anymore.
Yes, it would be cutting off the intellect, so do you think it would be
a good thing that he escapes that?
Answer: It gives him another chance.
Answer (from a different person): No, he should go through with it!
Yes, he should go through with it. What would the white bird be,
therefore?
Answer: The spirit.
Yes, the spiritual attitude. That is the typical trick of the intellectual,
on to whom all the unlived life and all the betrayed feeling–
relationships fasten, giving him a terrific sense of guilt; he then makes
a clever tour de passe-passe with the spiritual or intellectual
explanation––and escapes again. For example, he may say that these
are mere feelings of inferiority or of guilt which he must overcome. In
fact, this is the explanation that Mr. von Spät gives. Melchior falls into
the clutches of von Spät, who says, “Thank God you did not fall for
those judges! Thank God you freed yourself from the wrong feelings of
guilt." That is what the intellect calls it. We know that there are
pathological and morbid feelings of guilt and that sometimes one has
to push them off. There is a kind of wrong conscience which tortures
people to death; in women, it is generally the animus and in men the
mother anima that initiates such feelings. So it is a very mixed
problem, because having the apple–woman in it and all these feelings
251

Marie-Louise von Franz

of guilt, there is also a little bit of the mother–anima poison in it. What
would that mean? How does it look in practical life if people fall into
that state?––if they suddenly realize their unrelatedness, and then the
apple–woman comes in and it becomes so dramatic?
Answer: The anima does not want any further consciousness. She wants to
keep him where he is.
Yes, and she does that by terribly exaggerated emotional upsurge,
bathing him in feelings of guilt. This is also illustrated by the red velvet
hangings and the childishly dramatic performance in which he is
guilty of God knows what. That is the wrong kind of mea culpa (my
guilt) combined with true guilt, making a mix–up of genuine guilt and
an hysterical, exaggerated guilt–realization, which is just another kind
of inflation––an inflation of evil. "I am the greatest sinner. Nobody is as
abject as I. I have done everything wrong in my life"––and so on. That
is inflation; it is simply swinging over into the opposite. There is a
beautiful hint of this inflation of guilt, or inflation of blackness, in
which motif? The cloak which is nailed onto him. What does that
remind you of?
Answer: The cross.
Yes, before Christ was crucified a royal red garment was put onto
him because he was accused of pretending to be the King of the Jews;
so they put a scarlet robe him and crown of thorns, and mocked him.
That is a parallel. Only here the garment is black and the execution is
that of beheading, which is symbolic, because he had to be "deintellectualized." The garment is not the realization of his royal nature
but of his black nature. It is a kind of reversed crucifixion. But the
destructive or poisonous aspect is the exaggeration, namely, the idea of
feeling like a negative Christ: "I am the greatest center in the world and
am now suffering for my sins." The royal garment of sin!––there is the
inflation. What about the nails in the flesh? They nailed the black cloak
on him, and that causes the suffering.
Answer: It’s like being nailed to the cross, isn't it?
Yes, it is an allusion to the crucifixion of Christ, but with a variation,
for it is the wrong kind of identification. I can give you here an
interesting parallel in the dream of a woman who had tremendously
impressive visions and because of that she was very much estranged
from reality. She had an urge to exteriorize all this inner material by
telling it, but afterwards she had the experience, common to many
people after telling their great inner experiences, of being empty,
deflated—now I have told it all and am empty. Because of by telling
252

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

the inner experience one disidentifies, and just a miserable human
being is left who says, “Yes, and now what?” As long as it remains an
inner secret one is filled with it. According to her dream it was right for
her to tell and be separated from her visions, but then she dreamed
that a monument was shown for her—the figure of a naked man with
an enormous nail going through his shoulder and coming out at the
hip, and a voice said, “Lazarus was dead, a Lazarus is alive again.” She
asked me what this nail meant and I could not figure it out. I
remembered vaguely something about the thorn in the flesh of St. Paul
but my knowledge of the Bible was not good enough to get it at once,
so I said merely that in St. Paul there is something about a thorn in the
flesh. I thought it a strange motif and looked it up in the Bible, and in 2
Corinthians 12:7 St. Paul says:
Because I have such great revelations I have this
thorn in the flesh, so that I should not boast [I am
putting it in ordinary language]. So that I should not
boast of my revelations, God has put a thorn in my
flesh, and the angel of Satan is standing in front of
me, beating me down.
So, you see, the thorn in the flesh would be the reverse experience of
being inflated. If I have great visions, if I have inner revelations and
identify with them, then I get a thorn in the flesh, something which
should remind one constantly of one’s inferiority and meanness and
human incompleteness. That is how St. Paul put it. And now with this
woman it was the same thing. Through her inner experience she got a
tremendous inflation, and this last dream was an effort to show her
that the great inner experiences she had were, in another way, also a
wound, a constant torture—something that made her incomplete and
wounded. You could even say that those revelations are the thorn in
her flesh. It is a question of words whether in such cases you call the
person a great religious mystic or schizophrenic, for that is the
closeness of the two. Here we have the same motif, which again
indicates that there is a tremendous inflation of the feeling of guilt. You
know that when some people go off their heads, they say that they are
Christ, while others say that they caused the First World War. There is
not much difference between the two! It is megalomania, this way or
that. Sometimes it switches, and one minute they will say that they
caused the First World War and two minutes later that they are the
savior of the world. Once they have crossed the threshold, those two
inflations are one and the same thing, and that is only the extreme case
253

Marie-Louise von Franz

of something you always find on a minor scale when people have
committed some sin. Either they pooh-pooh it intellectually or they
bathe, in an emotional childish way, in their sin—in order not to see
their guilt—bathing with hysterical pleasure on one’s sins and feeling
so awful that everyone has to give comfort! That is a pathological
reaction which is just an escape from the realization of the real guilt.
Another aspect of the weakness of the feeling function in the author (or
in Melchior) is this typical reaction of an intellectual when he is hit on
his inferior feeling function, and because that becomes too painful and
too insufferable, the white bird, a kind of spiritual elation, carries him
suddenly out of himself by a trick.
Remark: I think it is so surprising that von Spät tells him to knock on the
wall and Melchior naturally expects them to get him, but instead…
He does get to von Spät. You will see later the Melchior circles
between the two worlds: the spirit world of von Spät and that of Fo—
the world of the mother and the boys. This does not give the picture of
a mandala but of an elipse because it is unbalanced. The anima, which
would make it round, is lacking. The mother would be an old figure
like von Spät and the anima would be a young figure like Fo, and these
two would make the circle complete. But these two poles are not there.
Sometimes the apple-woman turns up at one masculine pole and
sometimes the other, and the anima is not there at all, which together
with the unrelatedness shows the complete deficiency of the feminine
principle.
Von Spät says, “Knock on the wall!” He is always connected with
the idea of stars, the firmament, music, spirituality, power and order.
Von Spät
Fo
Stars
Mother
Spiritualization
Trees
Ghosts
Animals
Power and Order
Boys
Melchior knocks on the wall and comes to the von Spät pole and is first
attacked by his feelings of guilt. Afterward, as you will see, he will be
attacked by something else, and he always breaks away by means of
the white bird. Then he comes to von Spät, who says, “You did very
well, you broke through the feelings of guilt.” So you see the white
bird is von Spät’s messenger, and that would be the magic trick by
which to get out of the feeling of guilt with a kind of false spirituality.
You just have to do some Yoga exercises or Subbud, or something like
that, and then you are free again. And von Spät is all for such tricks
254

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

and compliments Melchior on his escape.
Remark: I don’t see the importance of the slippers I think the relationship
might be under the slippers of one’s wife!
The be sure, the slippers have a fatal implication, but on the other
hand Sophie says, “I took a whole year to embroider them,” which
implies a lot of libido. Imagine embroidering for a whole year! It must
have been petit point plus petit point, and she gave a lot of love to it. I
don’t see Melchior would have been under the slipper, but simply to
kick them away like that, after someone had worked a whole year for
you, means being unrelated. If he had looked at the slippers, he would
have said to himself that he must give some response to that feeling,
but not get under her slipper. That would have created a conflict
because that is what women always do: they give genuine love and
add a little power-trap. That is exactly what the feminine problem is
for the man: that usually there is in women a mixture of genuine love
and devotion and then a little left-hand power-trick to put him in a
box. His mistake is that he simply casts away the whole thing, and that
is just what the puer aeternus man often does. Because there is always a
little power-trick in the woman’s love, he takes that as an excuse to
reject the whole thing: all women are rotten—their love is nothing but
putting one under the slipper, nothing but putting one into a box.
Cheap sweeping statements such as these save the man the
difficulty of asking every minute of the day, “Is this a trick or is it
love?” Such statements show that the man is not up to that problem
with women. If he is not conscious of his anima and his own eros, he
will always fall for tricks. For instance, he wants to go out, and his wife
thinks that he might meet Mrs. So-and-so, in whom he is interested, so
she pretends to have a headache and says, “Let’s stay at home, I have a
headache.” But if he has a differentiated feeling function he will sense
that today this is a trick, and he therefore will say that he is going out
and that if she has a headache she can stay at home. The next evening
she has a real headache, and it is very unrelated if he says, “No, to hell
with you, I am going out!” Only if a man has a differentiated erosdevelopment can he find out whether a woman is playing a trick or
whether it is the real thing, and that is exactly what men do not like to
do; they like sweeping generalizations: “I never go in for that” or “I
always such-and-such.”
If a man takes a feeling-problem seriously, he has, from minute to
minute, to relate to what the woman does and, on top of that, he has
always to be aware of whether it is power or real feeling, which in an
255

Marie-Louise von Franz

unconscious woman are very close to each other. If you are an analyst,
the problem is the same: an analysand may bring to you a tremendous
amount of feeling, but, as Virgil says, there is always a snake in the
grass, which means that you are never quite sure what she is up to, but
if you reject the whole transference on account of that, then you
destroy the patient’s feeling. And you are not a good analyst. If you
cannot accept the real feeling in a transference, you are destructive to
the analysand. On the other hand, if you fall for the transference and
eat it up, the she will nicely put you in her pocket and make a fool of
you.
So whenever a man is confronted with the problem of relating to a
woman, he has to perceive the difference between snake-in-the-grass
tricks and genuine love, and he cannot discover that difference without
possessing differentiated feeling. If he has that, he will just smell a rat
and know from the woman’s voice that she is up to something, or from
her eyes and her voice he will learn that it is feeling to which he must
respond. But a man can learn that only by differentiating his anima for
a long time, by dealing with her and with the problems of relationship.
If he makes a principle of yes or no, then he is not capable of relating to
women or of being an analyst.
Here there is the either-or attitude. Melchior rejects women together
with their slippers. Clearly he is not a man who falls under the
domination of his wife’s slippers. He fought against that, and you
remember the trick she played by not having his room heated so that
he should be forced to come to her party. That is a typical feminine
trick, but Melchior does not fall for it. He sees through such tricks, but
he does not see that Sophie also loves him; he doesn’t realize that for a
woman the one does not exclude the other. For her the two go together
—she can love a man yet play such tricks—and it is the man’s task to
discover from minute to minute which is which.
You will remember that in the last chapter Melchior, with the help of
the white bird, escapes the big wave which drowns all his accusers and
executioners. Then he walks up a mountain and slowly rises above the
trees.
Night comes on and he hears the howling of a wolf.
In the light of the stars he sees shadows, and soon he
sees that a ring of wolves surrounds him. Terrified, he
stops, each time he moves they snarl, but when he
keeps perfectly still they do not attack. So he sits
there and does not know whether he has sat for hours
256

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

or minutes. He looks toward the horizon where the
sun is slowly rising, and at that moment tears come
into his eyes. He sees the light coming and stretches
out his arms toward it. The wolves disappear like
clouds.
Toward midday he comes into a fog smelling of
mold and decay. He cannot see well, but he arrives at
a kind of wooden fence. He goes into a courtyard
overgrown with grass, in the middle of which is a
tumble-down hut full of people with birdlike hooked
noses and piercing eyes who are selling large yellow
mushrooms with green spots. The sun is shining on
them, but a yellow mist rises from them and there is a
strange smell. The little people say, “Please buy the
mushrooms. They are the last. The earth is dissolving
into mist, the sun rots. Buy mushrooms as long as
there are any. The woods are dying, and the world is
exploding. Bargains! Good bargains!
He turns faint in the mist and feels heavier and
heavier. Still feeling the wounds from the black coat
on his shoulders, he walks around among them. It
looks as though the whole earth were covered with
dirt and mold. He hears the uncontrollable feminine
laughter, and turns around and sees the old applewoman among the people, dancing completely naked
making indecent gestures. She too cries, “Buy
mushrooms! Buy mushrooms! They are the last! The
earth molds and the sun rots! The woods die! The
world explodes! Bargains! Good bargains!”
Then a handsome, sensuous-looking young
woman who also makes indecent gestures and who is
also quite naked joins him They surround Melchior
more and more closely, and he gets terribly
frightened and takes a knife and tries to kill them. But
their blood changes into red mist, their wounds close,
and they become alive again and laugh in a more and
more cynical way. They seize him, and he shuts his
eyes and sees a blue light within himself as if he had
a vision of the cold sky with its stars, and in the cold
sky an enormous body forming. He pulls himself out
257

Marie-Louise von Franz

of the embrace of the women and tries to sing. His
song is echoed a thousandfold until the music dies
away. The lights go out and it is daytime again. He is
standing in front of a glacier and sees far away a kind
of crystalline building and von Spät standing in front
of him. That hellish dream of the mushrooms has
disappeared.
Von Spät says to him: “You have found the way.
Now you are one of us. You have escaped the
judgement of human beings. You have now overcome
the greed of the animals, and you have banished the
vengeance of the decaying earth. Now you serve the
stars, and you are a master over human beings (the
power principle), animals and the earth. Come, and
we will crown you as one of our brothers.”
Instead of pleasure, Melchior feels as if something
really deadly cold were creeping toward him, but von
Spät takes his hand and leads him away. “Night and
chaos are overcome,” says von Spät. “Sleep has no
power any more. It is daytime always and light all
the time except when you go down onto the earth to
appear to sleeping people like a ghost.”
Then Melchior comes to a crystalline castle which
is built like a mandala, with a round roof, but the cold
is terrible. Von Spät tells him that he must wait until
he is called and that his staff is there on the table
beside him. (The staff is like a magician’s wand and is
decorated with pearls arranged as letters.) Melchior
leans against a pillar and realizes that it is made of
ice. The room is empty. He takes the staff in his hand,
and his clothes fall away from him. The wounds close
and heal. He no longer notices the cold. A door opens
slowly and he goes into a big open place filled with
bright figures, their bodies like glass and their eyes
like blue stones. On a big pedestal there is a crown.
Bells rings, and everything vibrates in harmonious
music. At one side he sees a group of petrified,
immobilized boys, their heads hanging down. One of
the glass people orders two of them to come forward,
and with stiff movement they go up and take a
258

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

shining crown and lift it up in the light. Melchior
moves towards them. The rining of the bells ceases.
At this moment he feels lost and alone. Then the eyes
of one of the boys meet his, and he gets a terrific
shock for they are the eyes of Fo. He then realizes that
the boys belong to Fo’s group, and they have been
caught by their enemy, Ulrich von Spät, and they are
immobilized and petrified. He thinks: “I am going to
become as rigid as they! What have I done? I have
betrayed those to whom I belong and for whom I
have longed and waited all my life. They came to
fetch me for their group, and now I have betrayed
them to the enemy. I am (and this is the important
sentence) shattering life. I am breaking life apart.”
With horror he suddenly looks around while the
two boys who have to offer him the crown approach
him. He feels a terrible shudder go through him
when they hold the crown toward him, and then he
hears a soft voice whispering, “Don’t you want to go
away from here? Don’t you want to run away?” It
was Fo’s voice. At this Melchior comes alive again
and thinks, “He is here! Fo is here!” For a moment he
hesitates, for von Spät is looking at him threateningly.
But then he throws out his arms and says, “I want to
go away, I want to go away.”
At the same moment he feels the arms of the boys
seizing him, somebody kisses him on the lips, and
everything vanishes. The wind blows warm. He feels
as though he were sinking down in the warm air. He
opens his eyes and comes back to consciousness in a
meadow. The moon is shining and innumerable
fireflies dance in the summer air. He sees Fo’s face
bending over him and, smiling, falls into a deep
sleep.
After having fallen into the half-right, half-wrong feelings of guilt and
then having pulled away from them into a kind of wrong
spiritualization, he falls into the pack of wolves. How would you
interpret this psychologically? First the feeling of guilt because he has
missed the experience of love with the other sex and has missed life,
and now the wolves come up.
259

Marie-Louise von Franz

Answer: The wolf is an attribute of the witch and in its negative aspect
denotes the devouring mother.
Yes, in some variation of the fairy tale Mother Holle has a wolf’s
head. Mother goddesses and witches have a wolf’s head of iron, and it
does sometimes denote the devouring mother.
Question: This would be the opposite of the extreme spiritualization,
wouldn't it? It would be the other side.
Yes, one could say that whenever a man escapes the whole problem
of relationship by making the wrong kind of spiritualization, he is still
in the clutches of the devouring mother. What is much worse, he turns
all the women in his surroundings into devouring mothers. What else
can happen? If he doesn't relate, he can only be eaten! That is naturally
the wrong thing, but it is a kind of involuntary and automatic reaction
in a woman. The more the man refuses to accept relatedness, the more
she feels that she has to imprison him, catch him, eat him up, forbid
him to move around. So he calls up the devouring mother in every
woman, and then it is a vicious circle. He is disappointed because
every woman turns out to be a devouring wolf. Then he says, “There
you are! That is what I always said!" and walks out on the woman.
Actually, his flightiness has constellated her devouring side, and for
this reason he is again caught in the vicious, destructive circle. Because
he does not relate, she comes with her trap and a box to put him in.
Because he has no love, he summons her power–complex.
So you can say that a man with that attitude toward feeling finds the
devouring mother everywhere within and without. And that would be
the wolf. But beyond that, the wolf in mythology doesn't only have
feminine witch qualities. There are other aspects: for instance, in the
Etruscan tombs the god of death has a wolf's head or a wolf’s cap. The
Greek Hades was also often represented with a cap on which was the
head of the wolf, so it is also the abyss of death, thought of as being a
kind of devouring jaw, eating people up. The wolf stands––not only in
women but also in men—for this kind of drivenness in wanting to
have things without any further purpose. Jung says that often among
the strongest drives with which we are confronted when we open the
door of the unconscious are the power drive, sex drive, and then
something like a hunger which just wants to eat and assimilate
everything without any reason or meaning. It is that which always
wants more and more. If you invite such people to supper, they are not
pleased but simply furious when you don't invite them again next
week. If you give a tip, they are not grateful, for the next time if you
260

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

don't give them more, they say, “What? Only a franc?"
The worst are those who in early childhood have been starved of
love. They go about pale and bitter with a “nobody loves me”
expression, but if one makes a kind gesture, there is no appreciation,
only the desire for more. If you don't give more, than they are furious
and enraged. You could go on and on and pour the whole world into
such an open mouth––and it wouldn't help. You could throw
everything in; you can be up nursing them night and day, give them all
your money, do anything you like––they would never find it enough. It
is like the abyss of death: the mouth never shuts; there is only the
demand for more. It is a kind of driven passion of eating and eating,
and it generally results from an early childhood experience where the
child was starved and deprived of love or of some other vital need on
the psychological or physical level. One day one can only say no
whenever such greed comes up because there is no end to it. It is a
divine–demonic quality. It is that thing which says, “More! Still more!
Still more and more!"
The wolf in Germanic mythology belongs also to Wotan and one of
his names is Isengrim, which really means “iron head." But it has also
been interpreted in folklore as “grim, cold rage," and you can say that
the wolf very often stands for a kind of cold, hidden resentment. Most
people who have had a very unhappy childhood have something like
this at the bottom of their souls. It never comes up. It is absolutely
frozen and cold, a form of petrified rage, in that it also behind the
demand for more and more: “The others owe me everything." If one
has to deal with orphans or children who have grown up in a “home”
and have been beaten a lot, one can generally see the wolf very clearly.
But naturally it is not confined to them alone. Many others have this
kind of wolf quality in them. Melchior has been frustrated from early
childhood. We know that his mother was a weak, sickly woman, who
did not look after him, that in early childhood he was so lonely that he
saw his double at the window. We know that he did not grow up in a
warm, instinctually healthy atmosphere. So this is a typical case of
such a situation, and in him there is this greed and the longing always
to have more.
After having overcome his half–right and half–wrong hysterical
feeling of guilt, he now falls into this new trap, and here again he gets
out of it by longing for the light. When he stretches out his arms for the
light the wolves disappear, so he does not really deal with the problem;
he falls into it, and then, by enantiodromia, comes out of it when the
261

Marie-Louise von Franz

night turns again day. He falls into that state without realizing what it
means and by the grace of God gets out of it again. Naturally, in such a
case nothing is worked out all. It sinks again into the night, and the
next situation in life will bring it up again.
Some people who have this wolf problem realize that this kind of
greedy wanting more and more and eating everybody and everything
up is mad and unreasonable, so they don't let it out. They behave very
correctly and never ask for more, but you always suspect that it is just
politeness behind which is caged the starving wolf. Such people then
suddenly fall into the wolf and come out with terrific and impossible
demands which cannot be fulfilled, but if you want to discuss it
analytically and say that now we must discuss that problem they want
to tell a very interesting dream and the wolf side is just gone again. I
may say, “Listen, I am sure you are furious because I could not do
what you wanted when you rang me up, and I think we ought to talk
about that." But they reply that that is quite alright, they quite
understand. The wolf has gone into the woods again, although you
know that nothing has been settled. It would be much better for that
person to make a terrific scene, and then we could deal with it. But it
has all crumbled away, and if you then artificially, on account of the
dream, say that now they should come out with it, you will get the
reply, “But I know it is unreasonable. I know you have no time. I know
I should not have asked it of you." So the wolf has disappeared, but
without being transformed. That is what happens in this story.
Melchior gets into and walks out of it, and the next step is the same
thing with those moldy mushrooms and those sensuous women
dancing around, saying that the earth is now being destroyed. How
would you interpret this motif?
Answer: The great mother and her dactyl or Cabiri.
Yes, it is the Great Mother with her primitive Cabiri adherence, but
how would you interpret the mushrooms? They say the wood is
decaying. Now the wood is a mother symbol, but what is this? You
have the feeling that here is Great Mother Nature, but what about it?
Answer: She is not sane.
Yes, it is an unhealthy nature, sickly nature. It is morbid and there is
also morbid sensuality.
Remark: It is very probable that the last thing we shall see on the earth is a
mushroom!
That is quite possible. There is an area where the mushroom now
plays a role that is invading our world, namely, in the new drugs, some
262

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

of which are made from some kind of fungus. This is invading
psychiatry, and it is now hoped that a chemical cure for schizophrenia
will be found. It is indeed quite possible that this can be done because
any kind of overemotional state causes intoxication, and we believe
that in schizophrenia there is a certain condition of intoxication, and
then, naturally, you can eliminate these results. The snag is, however,
that if you analyze people after they have been treated with these
drugs, you find that if you analyze such people after they have been
treated with these drugs, you find that the psychological problem
which brought about the schizophrenic episode is not removed. All the
morbid emanations of the problem—that people behave in a mad way
and rave, and other symptoms—these things you can stop with the
drug, but analysis shows that the basic problem remains unchanged. If
at this point you do not use psychotherapy, the patient is just headed
for another episode and then the drug will have to be given again. This
process can continue endlessly. After such a partial cure with drugs a
series of dreams will point out the danger of a counter-tendency—of
saying that I can continure with my wrong attitude, and the next time I
go off my head I will just ask for another pill. The worst thing about
the drugs is that with people of weak character they even have a
demoralizing effect. Such people do not want to change their attitude;
it is much easier to go on with it, and if a psychotic episode occurs and
they fall into the unconscious, they can have a drug to get out of it
again—so it is all right! They do not want to return to psychotherapy
because the other is the easy way, but it results in constant relapses and
more drugs.
I know the case of a woman, a nymphomaniac, who lived that to
such an extent that she dissolved physically and psychologically, and
sank into a psychotic episode. She got the drugs, came out of it
reasonably, and the next dream clearly announced that her real
purpose was to carry on now. She did not need to face the thing which
had led to her slipping off into the unconscious; she could just take the
drug again. If you try to interfere therapeutically and say, “Now we
have pulled you out of the acute episode, but we still have to face the
problem,” such people don’t want to. The believe in the drug and think
why make a psychological effort if they can go on in the old way and if
anything goes wrong again, get another pill from the doctor! They is
why curing people by drugs is a very risky and dangerous business. In
a way, it us reasonable to use them, but it leads to a very difficult
situation afterward. I would not speak against the use of drugs in such
263

Marie-Louise von Franz

situations altogether. It is a short-cut to eliminate certain very
dangerous condition, but one pays for the short-cut because it
undermines the confidence of that patient in being able to pull out
through his own moral effort. It undermines the confidence of the
patient in being able to pull out through his own moral effort. It
undermines his belief in himself and naturally makes him forever
dependent on the doctos who have the pill when necessary. Those are
the pros and cons of using these remedies.
Remark: In my observation there is something which goes dead in the
personality. It’s like a loss of soul.
Not always, if the drug has not been used over a long period. I have
seen cases where that has not happened. Only belief and confidence
have been lost, not the soul. It might go dead if the episode has already
progressed very far and remedies have been used very much, but not
necessarily. Confidence dies, however, and that is the danger.
Remark: We don’t really know where it might not in some cases be better in
the long run for the person to go crazy. One doesn’t know.
That is naturally a question of the ultimate Weltanschauung, and
there we come to the end of a discussion, for you have to make up
your own mind as to whether you want to help people to become mad.
Remark: Nature brings it about.
Well I think it is a dangerous attitude to say, “Oh well, there are
people who are just good enough to go mad, so let them! That is how
Nature removes useless individuals.” There you come just as well in
physical medicine into the problem of euthanasia, where you say, “Oh
well, let’s kill off the old people and the morons, and so on.”
Remark: I did not mean it quite so negatively as that, but I have seen one or
two cases which by these drugs were forced into a kind of sanity which I
would think madness if preferable.
Yes, certainly, but that is not sanity; that is kind of a persona
existence, like a whitened tomb, which simply enables people to be less
disagreeable socially. Their behavior is just more tolerable, but except
for that nothing has changed and they are just as mad as before. I have
heard the confession of such a person. She had been changed into such
a white persona, but later when her madness came back, and with it
her better part, she said, “I was mad all the time. It was only covered
up. I had a pseudo-adapted behavior.” That is not a cure; it is only
beating up people into socially adapted behavior, so that they may be
less disturbing, which is naturally useful for the doctor. Is it really a
self-defense mechanism of the doctor’s.
264

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

Remark: I think if we don’t use drugs too long that the effect is reversible,
but also, what seems to be a loss of soul is really an abaissement of the
emotional level. When asked, they all say that the hallucinations and other
experiences of the psychotic stage are still there, but that they do not
experience the emotional part so strongly.
Yes. In a case where there was a lobotomy, the person told me that
all the time she felt that the madness was still there. She used a
metaphor and said, “It was in the cellar but it could not come up the
stairs any more.” She was carefully living in the upper story, and the
madness was one story lower, which would be exactly what you
describe. The emotional problem is not solved; it is only removed.
There is a certain distance between it and the person, and in this case
the operation had the same effect; it simply means cutting off the too
strong emotion. If people fall into too strong an emotion, they
afterward generally switch to the opposite pole of being too
unreasonable, and then they have a secret homesickness for their
former emotional madness because to be emotional and mad is to
experience the plentitude of life.
You are never fully alive as when you are mad. It is a kind of peak! If
you are not mad enough to have experienced that, then just remember
some time when you were absolutely madly in love, or in a mad rage.
What a wonderful state of affairs that is! Instead of being that broken
human being, always fighting between emotions and reason, you are
for once whole! For instance, if you let out your rage, what a pleasure!
“I told that person everything! I didn’t keep anything back!” You feel
so honest, and whole, for you haven’t been polite, but just said
everything! That is a divine state, absolutely divine, and it is a divine
state to love in that way, where there is no doubt any more. She—or he
—is everything! Divine, complete trust! No safeguards against the
faults of the other fellow human! None of that distrust that everybody
has toward everybody else, but instead: “We are one! We are one! And
the stars dance around us!” It is a state of totality. And the next
morning she has a pimple on her nose, and the whole thing collapses!
You are out of the total state. But emotion creates the experience of
being totally in something, whatever emotion it is, and that is why if
one makes people too normal then they are adapted but do not feel
complete any more. Secretly they long to return to their madness. So it
is no solution. One has to swing back again into the emotion and try to
get the two poles together. The reasonableness is the emotionality must
both be lessened.
265

Marie-Louise von Franz

The opposities must unite, like the opposites in our book where
pure emotion is represented by the boy Fo, and order and reason by
von Spät. The author of the book is torn between these two. At one end
everything is order, but rigid; it is a kind of madness, and that
overadaptation you get from drugs. The excess of reasonableness that
people have after an episode is a form of madness. It is mad to be as
coldly reasonable as that, and the other opposite is another form of
madness. If you cannot keep in the middle between the two you are
lost, which is exactly the tragedy of the book. If you take it on a
political level, you see the same thing in society: mad mass-psychosis
emotional movements where people go around with either a Celtic
cross or a Hakenkreuz, or whatever it may be, raving in emotion and
feeling whole. It is so wonderful to walk in thousands through the
streets, just howling, for then you feel whole and human. But then
there are the police and order, business order, the law and all the rest,
which is von Spät. Then you regress into what is called the restitution
after revolutions in which everthing is in order, but power dominates
and people are deadly bored and think how nice it would be if they
could go back into the chaos of revolution, where at least life flowed.
You see more and more how nations now switch between those two
poles, just as individuals do. Groups do the same thing everywhere,
and that is why we have to deal with the problem. It is urgent just now.
For instance, those people behind the barricades in Algeria with their
beautiful Celtic mandala cross, have practically no program! 20I am
sure most of those young people just enjoy the plentitude of life,
feeling whole and heroic and themselves, without any further thought.
They look as though they were moved by a total emotion of some kind,
and then that switches back to the boredom of order. And what can
you do with that? The order of von Spät is cold!

20

[This lecture was delivered February 17, 1960.—Ed]
266

Lecture 12

You will remember that Mr. von Spät nearly won out last time and that
Melchior was already in his glass and ice kingdom and on the point of
being crowned when suddenly he realized he was getting into a prison
and broke his bonds, saying he wanted to go away. By that he freed Fo
who took him with the boys.
They come to a meadow lit by moonlight. It is a
warm and the atmosphere is beautiful. They dance
around singing, and one of the boys throws a spear
at Fo, hitting him in the heart. Fo pulls it out of his
chest, and from the open wound a great stream of
water, not blood, flows onto the ground, from which
all the boys drink. As the flow decreases Fo becomes
small and thinner until he collapses, and his whole
body turns into a kind of mist which becomes
transformed into waves of sound. The stream dries
up, the boys sink back exhausted onto the grass and
fall asleep with their eyes open. From their foreheads
comes a glowing mist which turns into circles which
floats higher and higher, eventually forming one
great ball of mist which whirls around the moon in
even narrower rings, at last melting into it. The moon
increases in size and after a pause sinks to the earth,
splitting up into dustlike rays of light. Fo appears,
coming out of the rays, and touches all the sleeping
boys, who spring up, once more alive and laughing.
They surround Melchior and welcome him to their
group, but tell him that now he has to be crucified.
267

Marie-Louise von Franz

He is not frightened but accepts the ultimatum, and a
crown of thorns is put on his head from which he
feels no pain, only a slight faintness. Then they
crucify him. The nails in his hands and feet feel like
cold shadows, and his whole body like a light
shadow. He hangs…a shadow on the shadow of a
cross, high between heaven and earth, his face turned
toward the rising run. But he sees nothing, for heaven
and earth disappear. The first rays of the sun strike
his chest and tear open his body from which the
blood rushes in a mighty stream, dividing up into
innumerable little rivers which lose themselves in the
earth.
Then he realizes that he is no longer hanging on
the cross but has become one with it and that it has
become and enormous tree. From his stretched-out
arms come many branches; his hair waves in the
wind, his head grows larger and larger, and his roots
penetrate deep into the earth from which comes
springs of water. He hears the sound of a flute and
sees Fo sitting in the shadow of the tree playing. The
whole troupe dances around and fades away, and
already some of the boys are flying, as big birds in the
sunlight, and nest in his hair. Innumerable animals
surround him, and more and more come: leopards,
stags, wolves, bears and foxes—they come from all
parts of the forest.
A cry breaks from Melchior, and he becomes a boy
like the others. Fo still plays the flute and together
they sing: “All animals return to the Garden of
Eden.” As the song comes to an end, Fo puts aside his
flute and, going to Melchior, takes his hand, saying,
“You had a name. Do you still know it?”
Melchior tries to think but he cannot remember
and says he does not know. He asks if he has been
asleep and has just forgotten his dream?
Fo says that they all had other names before they
were crucified, but now they will take him in their
group and give him a new name, but it will not be his
true name, for that he will only hear when he comes
268

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

to the kingdom.
Melchior asks, “Which kingdom?”
Fo answers, “Our kingdom! That’s where we are at
home. There we play round the old fountains and
drink of the holy water, and there in black mirrors we
see everything we have lived. For the dark surfaces
(of the mirror) arise thousands of forms which we
leave behind when we leave the kingdom and which
we have to resume when we begin to wander
again.” (A very important place.)
Melchior asks, “And why have we to wander
about? (Notice that this question is not answered)
“Don’t you want to be everywhere?—to be the
wind and the rain, the trees and the grass? Don’t you
want to be a part of the sunset and to melt into the
moon? Don’t you want to be every animal, and every
human? To speak out of every mouth and see out of
each eye? We escape into and out of every figure.
Wherever we appear everything changes into a
whirlwind, and nothing is durable.”
“But when do we get to the kingdom?” Melchior
asks again.
“Today or tomorrow, or in innumerable years.
What does time matter? We can suddenly stand at the
crossroads, and one of the roads leads to the
kingdom, or it stretches out into a faraway golden
shores beyond great waters. Or we open the door into
a strange house—and have arrived. Everywhere we
can stand at its borders, but till then we must wander.
If we stop we shall never get there.”
“And where are we going now?”
“On and on,” says Fo, his eyes shining, “and
immediately in front of us is a big city, and when we
leave it our group will have grown bigger. And in
that city no one will know anymore….But you must
have a name. Who should give it to you? He from
whom you receive your name, he is your partner if
the group scatters.”
Melchior looks long at Fo and then asks, “Do you
want to come with me?”
269

Marie-Louise von Franz

And Fo answers, “Yes, we have saved each other,
so we will stay together.”
He then beckons to the boys who circle around and
says solemnly, “You shall be called Li!”
“Li! Li! Li!” the boys cry.
This is the anticlimax. In the previous chapter, Melchior was almost
completely caught in von Spät’s kingdom, but with a tremendous
enantiodromia it turned into the opposite so that now he is in the
kingdom of von Spät’s enemy, Fo’s kingdom. The first part of this
chapter reveals who Fo is. We know that he is the leader of the boys
and that his name points to Buddha; that Fo advocates eternal
wandering in karmic incarnations, whereas Buddha teaches escape
from the karma of incarnation, from the wheel of rebirth. Fo, on the
other hand, consideres endless incarnations a pleasure. Moreover, since
he turns into the moon and then returns to earth after having been
wounded, he is also a moon-god—a moon-god and the god of running
water. When his chest is cut open, blood does not flow but a spring of
life it is specifically stated that a white stream comes forth and that this
water revivifies all those who drink it.
Earlier, we saw from an allusion that von Spät is associated with the
old sun—Sol Niger, Saturn. In old sun-god mythology he would
correspond to the Greek Kronos and to Saturn in medieval alchemical
mythology. This we deduced from the fact that he danced with the
seven girls who would represent the seven planets surrounding the
sun-god. Fo, the opposite principle to the sun, is, logically, the moongod, the god of night, of sleep, of the irrational, of eternal change, with
naturally a latent feminine tinge. And it must not be forgotten that in
German the moon is masculine (der Mond) while in Roman mythology
it was hermaphroditic and was worshipped as both a male and a
female figure. This hermaphroditic aspect of the soul shows that the
symbol of the Self and the symbol of the anima are not yet separated.
Fo represents the unconscious in its feminine and in its masculine
personifications. He is the principle of the night, the other side of the
light of consciousness, but the anima has not yet been differentiated.
I have been asked to compare this book with Saint-Exupéry’s The
Little Prince to show the difference between German and Frech
mentality. Unfortunately I can only do this very briefly, but one of the
characteristics would be that on the other side of the Rhine, that is in
Germany, the symbol of the anima is not as much differentiated.
Practically the only feminine figures in this book are the apple-woman
270

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

(the mother nature figure), Sophie, who is a very negative and also a
rather maternal figure, and then the pale anima-girl, Henriette Karlsen,
who dies almost before she appears on the scene. The powerful soulfigure is an hermaphroditic being—namely Fo, the moon-god. If you
compare him with the soul-figure in Saint-Exupéry’s book—the couple
on the asteroid, the rose and the little prince—there the hermaphroditic
aspect is at least differentiated into a couple, and the anima is
differentiated one step further, although she is still a rather negative
feminine figure, both haughty and hysterical. She has not progressed
much, but at least she is separated from the symbol of the Self and
appears as an independent being. The national differences are strongly
contrasted in the two books. The German book gives the impression of
a more archaic, more powerful symbolism and much greater
dynamism. While reading it you are pulled into an emotional, dynamic
atmosphere with an hysterical, exaggerated tone which is not entirely
agreeable. If we look at the negative factors, the French book is
suffused with cruelty and childish sentimentality in contrast to the
dynamism and hysterical exaggeration of the German book.
Two assumptions to account for this difference can be made: first,
the the pagan, pre-Christian layer in France is more Celtic and in
Germany Germanic (you can read about the difference between the
Celtic and the Germanic character in Caesar and in Tacitus). Then—
and perhaps this is even more important—there is the fact that France
was thoroughly Romanized before it became Christian (and also
southern Germany and Austria to some extent, and Switzerland too),
whereas along the line of the Main River Germanic heathendom was
directly covered over by Christian conversion. One can say that in the
Mediterranean real Christianity was the end-product of a long
civilizing development and therefore became a spiritual and
differentiated religious form—that on the basis of the Roman
civilization it was possible for the people to understand the Christian
symbolism, and so, wherever Christianity was superimposed on a
Romanized background there was the possibility of a transition. In
areas where Romanization was lacking, the historical continuity of
evolution was interrupted and Christianity superseded something
very different. Using a metaphor, you could say that the north of the
Main, people have “a hole in the staircase”—a lower story and an
upper story in the middle an open space.
This situation is not only typical of Germany; it will arise soon (and
there will be a much greater problem) in Christianized Africa, where it
271

Marie-Louise von Franz

is already creating a terrific tension and restlessness, quite apart from
the other cultural and economic problems. Africans who have been
Christianized have that same hole in the stairs. The problem exists also
among the Americans who fell, when they went West as pioneers, into
a primitive civilization, namely, that of the American Indians. Survival
in that primitive environment could only be achieved by becoming as
tough and as primitive as the natives; on the other hand, the pioneers
had a Victorian Christian past, and this explains why the North
Americans have in many ways the same hole in the stairs (or a
variation of it) that the Germans have.
Such a hole is not only a disadvantage, however. The inner polarity
and tension which such a cultural situation creates makes people
dynamic, efficient and active. It can be said that is the electric plus and
minus poles are very far apart and very strong, then the electricity is
also much greater. So it creates more dynamic and active personalities,
with the drawback of a certain tendency to dissociate easily in mass
movements, the nucleus of the personality and its balance being more
easily disturbed.
Naturally, this hole in the stairs—now going back to a comparison of
the French and German mentalities—is only relative, for the French
have the same problem, but on a minor scale. It could be said to be
only relatively different, and naturally when you make such sweeping
statements about nations, there are many exceptions. This is just an
attempt to characterize it in a general way.
Question: Would the fact that the author comes from Riga and is Latvian
influence the whole concept?
The fact that he is from northern Germany, or Latvian, would make
it worse since it would mean having no home but widespread Roman
(underground), Russian and Slavonic influences. In northern Germany
there is already a strong Slavonic influence, which is why there is in
Germany a kind of secret hostility between the north and south.
The crucifixion of Melchior is very revealing because one sees that
Fo really represents the return of the archetypal figure which is also
behind the figure of Christ, in an older form. If we try to compare Fo
with other gods, one could say that he was closer to Dionysus. He is
the god of roses and grapes. Whenever Fo appears in the book, roses
and grapes are mentioned, so he is a kind of return of Dionysus. Again,
this crucifixion in which the crucified person turns into a tree reminds
us of Attis, who was changed into the Maternal tree. One could
therefore say that in giving himself to Fo, Melchior becomes “Attified.”
272

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

Since all the others had gone through the same fate, they seem to
consist of people who had first lived an earthly life and then were
crucified and turned into those eternally wandering boys. The myth of
Attis is repeated in each of one of them. As we know, Dionysus and
Attis represented the early-dying sun-god, the son of the mother, the
god who dies in the spring. The date of the Feast of Easter has been
taken over from the Feast of Attis, and mosaics were executed in
ancient Rome with the cross with grapes around it and an invocation,
“Oh thou, Dionysus, Jesus Christ.” So at the beginning at least there
was considerable doubt as to whether Christianity did not mean a
rebirth of Dionysus—or of Attis—but in another form. The Church
Fathers tried to make a definite break and establish Christianity,
hoping in this way to prevent the new symbol from being sucked back
into the past (which would have implied a victory for von Spät). To
make sure of its creative élan, the newly converted Christians where
emphatic in contending that Christianity was entirely different from
the cult of Dionysus. But the similarity of the archetypal figure was so
striking that everyone felt very doubtful, which account for such stress
being laid on the fact that Jesus Christ was an historical personality in
contrast to the archetypal god figure.
To return to the cultural problem: if, therefore, Fo returns in the form
of Attis or Dionysus, he could be said to represent an attempt by the
unconscious to create an archetypal experience which would bridge
the gulf created by this sudden Christianization. One might think that,
having passed through this experience, the author might now really
understand what the figure of Christ means. If you sweep away all the
accumulated historical dust, you see that this is a return to the original
experience of what it means to take the cross upon oneself, to carry it
and be crucified with Christ, only there is a different shade of
something more ecstatic and dynamic and, in an archaic way, vital. It is
an attempt of the unconscious to recreate the Christian symbol and
revive it in a form in which it is linked again with the deeper layers of
the personality.
How widespread and how vital this problem is can be seen by the
fact that one finds the same attempt of the unconscious in a completely
different sphere. Those among you who heard my lectures on Niklaus
von der Flüe will remember that there Christ appears with a bearskin
—as a Berserk—and there too it is an attempt not to abolish the symbol
of Chris but to reinterpret it, linking it with the archaic layers of the
instinctive psyche. Only if we understand it in this more complete
273

Marie-Louise von Franz

form can the symbol of Christ survive, for if it is not anchored in the
depths of the soul it will be cast off and there will be a return to
atheism and neo-paganism in some form.
The same thing can be seen in the Negro spirituals, which give
parallel phenomenon, for in them there is a pagan layer of the psyche
with its symbolic expressions and religious emotions, and over that is
layered a Christian doctrine, just a lacquer which any kind of
movement or anti-propaganda would remove. Unless the main
archetype of this of this Christian doctrine, which in our civilization is
called Christ, constellates in a similar archetypal symbol and links it up
with the whole emotional personality, whereby it becomes a living
faith, only then can people understand from underneath what Christ
means in them personally. Otherwise it is purely intellectual and there
is the hole in the staircase. Below one still prays to Dionysus, or in
these cases, naturally, Wotan, because the one who is speared and who
hangs on the World Tree is Wotan:
Christian doctrine
Christ
Pagan archetype
constellated below

Wotan (in Germany)
Mercurius-Kerunnus (in France)

In this book the archetype constellated below is Wotan, as is naturally
the case in a Germanic civilization. In France and those countries
where there is a Celtic background the archetype called up in this form
is not Wotan but Mercurius-Kerunnus, a stag god. This is a god who is
transformed, who is crucified, and who is the sacrificed sun god—the
spring god and the resurrected god—so in Celtic countries it is the
archetype of Kerunnus which is constellated by Christ. In medieval
legends, in the legend of the Holy Grail and also in Celtic material in
England, Ireland and Wales, it is the archetype of Mercurius-Kerunnus.
In all those cases there is an attempt to link these superimposed figures
of God with the old roots of the archaic and genuine inner experience.
There are other motifs in the description of the kingdom of Fo, for he
says “We play around on fountains (which reminds one of the
Germanic Fountain of Urd at the base of the World Tree) and we drink
of the holy water. (If you drink from the Fountain of Urd, you become
a seer. The shamans and the medicine men drink from that fountain.)
In black mirrors we see what we were.” Here and Eastern influence is
introduced which we have already noticed before—the idea that in this
kingdom you can mirror all former incarnations. We shall see later that
274

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

the author believes in reincarnation, something he has derived from
his Eastern studies that blended into this German material. Since the
Germanic races were, in general, on the introverted side, pre-Christian
Germanic civilization was introverted and had an affinity with the
Chinese and Eastern spiritual life. The Germanic runes (which we now
believe to be the letters of the Germanic alphabet) were originally used
as an oracle, as are the sticks of the Chinese oracle, the I Ching, and
even later were still used in this way.
For instance, when the Germans took prisoners, a certain number
were slaughtered in honor of Wotan, for which purpose the captors
“threw” the runes. That is, they took sticks on which they had carved
different runes, and if the specifically marked death-rune lay on top,
then that prisoner was sacrificed, while the others were kept as
servants or slaves. According to the myth, this technique of divination
was invented by Wotan when he was speared—we do not know
whether by himself or by another, but we must also remember the
spear of Longinus in the case of Christ—and here Fo is speared. Wotan
then hung nine days and nine night on the World Tree, Yggdrasil, after
which in bowing down (when he fell down) he discovered the runes at
his feet. Therefore, one could say that the creative product of the long
crucifixion was the discovery of the runes—a new manifestation of
cultural consciousness which originally consisted in reading the
moment of fate. This also underlies the ideas at the back of the I Ching,
which is a way of exploring the will of the gods, a method of
divination based on the principle of synchronicity.
Even nowadays many people who have a Germanic racial
background display a great affinity for the Eastern world, and it seems
to me that there is at present in Germany quite a widespread tendency
to seek the healing of their problem—the wound caused by the war—
by turning to Eastern philosophy. This would mean again finding a
sufficiently introverted attitude with which to work out the problem
from within, instead from without. Naturally, the big economic boom
now being experienced is very unfavorable for this, but all those who
try to work out such problems turn to introversion and cling mostly to
Eastern philosophy to help get into this attitude. I once suggested to
one of my analysands, a man from North Germany who was in the
habit of consulting the I Ching, to looks at this problem in this way. The
night after I told him what I am now telling you, he dreamed that he
was in front of a Prussian military barracks. At the entrance was a
shield with writing on it in Chinese signs and Germanic runes, which
275

Marie-Louise von Franz

shows that the unconscious at once picked up the suggestion as
relevant.
In scandinavian mythology, trolls are also regarded as a
manifestation of the principle of synchronicity. I do not want to go into
that, but I would say that people from the north of the river Main, if
they are creative, are more introverted and, like Eastern people, are
more interested in synchronistic phenomena than in rational causality
as is the case with Westerners. In the north of Germany there is a
tendency, which you see clearly in Russia, toward the great problem of
uniting the Eastern and Western minds in a middle attitude. In the socalled Pan-Slavonic movement, to which Dostoyevski belonged, it was
claimed that Russia was the chosen country that which one day would
be able to unite the introversion of the East with the efficiency and
extraversion of the West. Currently they have departed from that idea
by becoming completely extraverted.
The kingdom is characterized here in a strange way, for it is partly
the Garden of Eden, to which all the animals return, and partly the old
paradise of the Germans, the Fountain of Urd under the World Tree.
But it is also clearly influenced by Eastern ideas of Nirvana, where one
finally escapes the eternal wandering from one reincarnation to the
another, except—which is interesting—that Fo and his band have not
yet reached the kingdom and that they see a meaning in wandering,
which is opposed to Buddhist teaching, according to which one should
escape the karmic wheel of reincarnation. This is a more Western
tendency, and a rather fatal one, namely, the glorification of dynamic
movement in itself, even if it has no goal. But the exaltation of feeling
psychologically alive and being in a creative movement with neither
result nor goal is dangerous and demonic.
You will remember that I spoke of von Spät was successful and
then, with Fo and the crucifixion, came the enantiodromia which was
really Fo’s victory. Later it turns the other way once more. von Spät is
fatal, because at his pole things are absolutely static; once you are in
the glass palace, in the spirit kingdom, nothing happens any more.
Everything becomes glasslike, transparent and rigid, whereas at Fo’s
end there is an absolute glorification of the creative movement and
ecstasy in itself, with the idea that creative ecstasy has a meaning in
itself, irrespective of whether there is any result. What is being taught
is a constant continuation of emotional and creative ecstasy. We find
this expressed in rock-’n’-roll dancing which represent the enjoyment
of psychic and physical dynamism and musical rhythm, with no
276

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

further goal. When it is over, you are tired, and the next evening you
start again, and that in itself is satisfactory. On von Spät’s side there is
result without life movement and at Fo’s end, eternal movement
without result. It is another example of extreme one-sidedness, with no
union of opposites. One is simply being torn between them.
von Spät
Melchior
Fo
Reason without Life

(Ego)

Eternal Movement
without Result

Ice-North

Li
(Consciousness)

South

There could only be healing if two other (feminine) poles had
developed, because in a man’s psychology the feminine, the anima
principle, is the principle of reality and also realization. That is lacking
in this constellation.
I will now condense the middle of the book. Fo, eyes shining, says
that now they are going toward a city. He turns to give a name to
Melchior—Li, consciousness, the thing that Melchior should provide.
What follows is easy to understand and not very symbolic. It tells of
the mischievous deeds of Fo and his band.
The story is that there was a town called
Stuhlbrestenburg. (Bresten is an old German word for
disease, and Stuhl means either chair or excrement,
but here it obviously means the latter, so it would
mean “Excrement-Disease Town”.) In this town it is
said that there was once a big figure which almost
wiped out the town. The king, who was of a
whimsical turn of mind, had thought the old walls
should not be pulled down but that the burnt-out
houses should be cut off at a certain level, say two
meters above the ground, and left completely black.
Over them a new town would be built in a very light
and elegant Rococo architecture. The king, Walter II,
thought this very amusing. But what happened was
that a criminal world collected in the subterranean
area and connected all the cellars, so that the whole
underworld could communicate. From time to time

277

Marie-Louise von Franz

these people made a sortie and robbed banks, etc.,
and then hid again in the burnt-out black cellars. The
police could never completely exterminate them, so
that the bourgeoisie in the upper stories of the houses
were constantly threatened by them. The situation
became aggravated when the police caught one of the
chief criminals who divulged information concerning
the geographical network of the underworld, with
the result that the police decided on a big coup to
clean up the whole gangster set-up.
Of the townspeople it was said that they worked
hard but that they lived at a terrific pace, both
violently and greedily. Their factories, churches and
pleasure houses—brothels and so on—were full of
life, but the atmosphere was hot and a bit unclean. A
kind of miasma rose up perpetually from the black
walls below.
Trouble now started up in the neighboring town of
Rattenhausen when a school teacher who had once
done some wrong to a pupil, a romantic boy of the
type of Otto von Lobe, suddenly had the
hallucination that one the boys in his class was the
same boy whom he had wronged twenty years ago.
The teacher fell on his knees in front of the boy and
begged for pardon. It turned out that the boy, Ranke,
of whom he was supposed to have begged
forgiveness was at this time at home in bed and had
not been at school at all at that time. The headmaster
himself went to the boy’s home and verified the fact.
There was a great fuss and the teacher lost his job.
The next morning more than half the boys could not
be found. The second result, which occurred
practically at the same time, was that a very
honorable banker, Mr. Rotbuch, at mid-day when the
rest of the staff was absent, was seized by a crazy
idea. He opened a window on the first floor of the
bank and threw all the money onto the crowded
market place. This caused an indescribable tumult in
which two people were killed and many severely
hurt.
278

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

The banker was arrested and put in the lunatic
asylum. When he regained control of himself he said
he did not know what had come over him. Two boys
wearing turned-up collars and leather caps had come
to him and told him to do this, and he acted under a
kind of compulsion. On the same day, the doors of
the prison were found open, the warders tied up in
the henhouse and the director of the prison, dressed
in full uniform, was discovered flaying around with
his arms and crowing like a cock. All the prisoners
had disappeared, and it was supposed that they had
fled to Stuhlbrestenburg and joined up with the
underground gangsters.
In the Rattenhuser Bote a group of shameless
teenagers had probably read too much of Sherlock
Holmes, Karl Marx and Alexander Dumas. Poisoned
by them they had tried to seduce the people into
following impossible ideas. It was said that all this
resulted from the haste and greed for new sensation
which are part of present-day life—what was once a
miracle is now a daily event— so that even sober
people were no longer able to discriminate between
the possible and impossible. In such stormy time, the
article continued, when everything is topsy-turvy, we
can only advice our worthy fellow citizens to believe
only in things which are officially confirmed. The
only thing which remains firm is official sanction—
Sigillum signum veri (the seal of the State stands for
truth). The principal officials recommended a search
for the evil-doers so that they might not bring about
more harm and confusion and said that the people
should follow the Government’s lead—Caveant
consules. A psychiatrist, Mr. Hinkeldy, wrote another
article of mass psychosis and warned against
overwork, too much introversion, and too many
fantasies. He recommended cold foot-baths before
going to bed and rubbing the whole body with a
damp cloth on getting up in the morning!
In the next chapter the same boys wearing the
turned-up collars and leather caps appeared in the
279

Marie-Louise von Franz

Cathedral. People outside heard beautiful music and
went in. They found the place full of people, the altar
candles burning, and dance music being played,
which infected everybody to such an extent that they
forgot where they were and danced around madly.
The music got wilder and wilder, with drums, violins
and trumpets, and when the organ joined with the
thunder of the underworld, people could stand it no
longer. The teacher, the district court judge and the
public prosecutor jumped about like goats, together
with the market women. When the music ceased,
Pistorius, an old member of the Consistory, appeared
in all his vestments, and the people were suddenly
silent and fell on their knees begging for pardon as he
went up to the pulpit. But from the pulpit came loud
continuous laughter. Pistorius’s full red face became
smaller and whiter. For a minute looked like a halfgrown boy, and then, standing up in the pulpit, his
shaggy front legs supported on the reading desk,
appeared a bleating white he-goat.
It was a mass hallucination in which they were all
caught, all except Flamm, the teacher, who began to
speak. But hundreds of boys descended on him from
the organ and clapped and mocked him. Then a
naked youth appeared at the altar and played on his
flute, whereupon the choir appeared as dogs among
the people. Those who were frightened tried to
escape, but the doors were shut, so they climbed up
on the benches and tried to get out through the
windows. When the flute fell silent, the youth, the
boys and the roses all disappeared and the doors
stood open. No one dared say a word, and they slunk
out onto the street.
The judge, who had been in the cathedral, went
across the court where a man was to be tried for a sex
murder. The public prosecutor stood up to speak and
for an hour opened and shut his mouth, getting more
and more excited, but not a word was audible. When
he dropped white and exhausted onto his seat, a
woman dressed in white clapped and applauded. The
280

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

defendant’s lawyer then got up to speak, but before
he could begin his exact double appeared before him
and accused him of being a fraud. He was so
horrified that he could only stammer a few words,
whereupon the other accused him of being unable to
say anything in his defense. The uproar in the court
was quelled with difficulty. Then the fraudulent
lawyer began a long speech in which he said that
after all the accused was only seeking his own
pleasure, just as others seek their pleasure in judging.
What was the difference? Some took pleasure in
morality and others in immorality, some in
murdering people and others in following the law. He
turned everything upside down, and there was such
confusion of the just and the unjust that everyone
was exposed in his ape-like greed and amorality.
In place of the counselor appear a naked boy who
played the flute in the Cathedral, and a woman
dressed in white then intimated that she and the
counselor had spent half and hour together in the
next room, where she had been quite irresistible, and
that he had stuck a paper knife into her breast when,
in his arms, she had first turned into a boy and then a
sow. The ivory handle of the paper knife was still
visible in her breast. The boy took hold of the
counselor’s hand and said, “See, it is full of blood,”
and as the blood ran onto the ground the accused
came up and good-naturedly asked the counselor for
a kiss, saying that they were all brothers.
The accused was then declared innocent, the boy
and the woman in white clapped their hands and
cried out, “And now kiss each other!” Once more
there was a terrific scene in which everybody
embraced and kissed—anyone and everywhere.
Outside, all the bells of the town began to ring, and
everybody questioned everybody else—contended,
contradicted, fought, screamed and raged—until the
police came with their swords.
While all this was happening in the Law Courts,
the king was in the theater. (He was a romantic young
281

Marie-Louise von Franz

man and sick of ruling. Actually, he appeared very
much to resemble Ludwig II of Bavaria, the artist
king.) He was deadly bored with his duties as a king
and, sitting in his royal box, was filled with romantic
ideas and melancholy, and was bored with the play.
In the principal scene, there was a discussion between
the hero of the play, the director of some electricity
works, and his step-brother. The director made a long
speech in favor of materialism, of himself and of his
like, saying that with them the gold is in the good
hands of practical idealists. But then two boys
appeared on the stage, and once more there was
chaos. The director was transformed into a ball which
was first tossed from one boy to another and then to
the king, who caught it and threw it back, whereupon
it burst with a loud bang. The king clapped
delightedly, and two more boys appeared who put a
crown on his head, scepter and orb into his hands,
and an ermine cloak around his shoulders.
The boys took him by the hands and let him down
a ladder of flowers which had appeared between the
box and the floor of the theater. The audience stared
in dumb horror. The court marshal tried to save the
situation by shouting “Hurrah!,” and some began to
sing the national anthem. The crown fell from the
king’s head and proved to be made of paper. Smoke
began to rise from the corners of the theater. King and
boys disappeared, the doors burst open, and dark
figures appeared with hatchets and pistols ; people
shrieked, saying they were from the underworld.
People were shot, or killed by the swords and
hatchets of the intruders; the smoke increased and the
building burst apart, burying the people underneath
it.
In the whole town a terrific battle was going on,
and nobody knew who was fighting whom. In the
market place a dark figure had swung himself onto
the top of a stationary tram, and, standing in the glow
of the burning theater, he cried out, “Friends! Stop! Be
reasonable! It is only because you are afraid of each
282

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

other that you are murdering each other. The old
order makes enemies of you. Create a new order! Do
not forget who are your real enemies—the boys! They
hide everywhere and in every form. Who are they?
Who knows them? Where do they come from?
Wherever they appear everything becomes chaotic. If
you follow them you will have no peace. The ground
will shake under your feet. All life and order will
vanish. A whirlwind will seize you, and madness will
tear you apart in horror!”
For a minute the people remained motionless, but
their uneasiness grew. Cries, oaths and questions
broke out: “The boys! Where are they? Look for the
boys! Kill them! No, kill that man, he is a traitor!”
Again the speaker stretched out his hands. “My
friends,” he began again, “You are searching for God,
the new God, to be created by your own will, your
longing, and your work.” (The God whom the ego
has created! What nonsense!) “You want your life to
have a new form; you want a holy order, the holy
order of your work. It lies within you, this holy order
and longing. I will show it to you. I will teach you
about that which you feel within you. I will give you
the laws you can follow. We (the ghost world of Von
Spät) want to heal and to serve you!”
The moonlight fell on the figure, and a crowd of
people surged around him, begging him to teach
them and stay with them.
“We want to help you,” answered the figure, his
voice sounding like bell. “Do not dive again into the
old dark well! Do not hunger for an eternity that does
not exist!”
Again the crowd cried out for the boys, saying that
they would kill them. The figure warned against
touching them, but nobody listened. Then in the
middle of the square a flame shot up, and in its red
light appeared a group of naked boys. In a second
there was a deathly silence. A boy moved forward
and spoke: “Come to us, those of you who are free.
Let the others build towers up to heaven! Let them
283

Marie-Louise von Franz

petrify in their order, work and happiness! Let those
who love the flame and eternal transformation come
to us—into our night when their day suffocates you—
into our kingdom when theirs is destroyed!”
From the naked group there broke out a song. A
shudder went through the crowd. But then a new
song joined in, for the glassy men were also singing.
The crowd seized rifles, made a dash for the boys, but
a gust of wind changed into the sails of an immense
fireboat which lifted the singing group above their
heads. There were shouts of “Shoot them down!
Don’t let them escape!” The guns took aim, the
fireboat in which the boys were collected dispersed
into sparks. Millions of roses were scattered all over
the square and filled the air with sweet breathtaking
scent.
From the boat (clearly the Thespis boat of Dionysus) and the roses, it
becomes more and more evident that this is a new form of the old
archetypal figure of Dionysus. From the two speeches it is clear who
von Spät and Fo are, for the polarity is obvious.
The contents of the book speak for themselves. It is amazing to think
that the book was written about fifty years ago and that we have
passed through all that was predicted—which shows how prophetic
art can be. Even the burning of the Reichstag came about, and there is
no need to make any further interpretation. But the strange and
uncanny thing is the motif of the burned town, upon which the lighthearted and thin upper architecture is constructed. That shows that if
there is such a hole in the staircase—such a blatant contrast between
the lower, emotional, archaic parts of the psyche, with its pagan
outlook on life, and an upper layer of a higher civilization—then, if the
problem is not made conscious and faced, it continually creates general
catastrophes such as wars and revolutions, followed by a kind of
representative reconstruction on top of the debris, the old rubbish not
having been cleared away.
It is frightening that just this is happening again in Germany, for the
Germans are again creating a big economic boom, with great élan,
upon the burnt-out ruins of the world wars, and the one thing which
one cannot now discuss with the Germans is what really happened.
Most people in Germany do not want to face that particular question—
it is all past and was horrible and “I disapprove of what took place, but
284

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

let us not look at it anymore. Let us quickly build up again a new form
of life”— which means that nothing has been cleaned up. Now that
things have quieted down, they do not say, “Let us look back and ask
ourselves what really happened, psychologically.” Now should be the
time for reflection. Instead, a subterranean world is built up, teeming
with revolution, which is already showing itself in the painting of
swastikas and other impulses.
It is just the same if people break down neurotically and pick up
again with the help of Largactyl or Serpasil, and so on, and then go on
in the same old way, instead of for once turning to the unconscious and
asking what was at the bottom of it. In a breakdown there is always
something positive which wants to come through and creates the
breakdown. If the person does not turn and do as Cinderella did—
discriminate between the good and the bad corn—that person does not
only lose connection with his or her own past personal psychology, but
also loses connection with the positive values of the unconscious. The
same is true of National Socialism, which was a distorted impulse
toward the renewal and creativity. If this symbolic figure, Fo—who is
clearly a new form of the archetypal savior figure— had been realized
by the Germans, not in this political Fürher craze, but subjectively—
that is, an introverted way, inwardly—it would have been the
beginning of a great creative dynamism. Instead of that, it was
externalized and mixed up with political propaganda and a fatal
power drive which culminated in the catastrophe which we have all
seen and suffered from.
On a large scale we see a development absolutely parallel to the
development of the neurotic individual, for what is constellated in a
neurosis is really something creative which, if not recognized, will
word toward a breakdown. If one turns toward it, that which makes
one sick is also the healing thing. It is clear from this book that the
romantic, religious élan vital of National Socialism might have brought
about a tremendous cultural renewal of the German people and great
progress in consciousness. But because of the wrong twist the dynamic
energy became extraverted political aims instead, and the opposite
came about—and the terrible catastrophe. There is another reason why
I lecture on this book (I speak of the Germans because the book came
out of Germany, but the problem is widespread). The same situation
exists in America, especially with young people. In different counties
there is a different tinge, but it is a modern problem and not just a
German problem, although Germany was the first, the locus minoris
285

Marie-Louise von Franz

resistentiae (place of little resistance) where the disease showed itself.
We all suffer from it in different variations.
If this breathing through of the new god had been realized inwardly,
it would have led to the discovery of the unconscious and of the
necessity or turning creatively toward it. But von Spät, who represents
the eternal seduction to turn the unique inner experience into an outer
collective order, got the Germans into this fatal vicious circle. And
what is more terrifying is that right now they are again building a light
rococo architecture, all rosy and white, on top of the burnt-out ruins
and are therefore moving toward another catastrophe—unless for once
a few people notice what they (and we) are moving into.
Question: Are there any large groups in our society which do not have
what you described as a hole in the staircase?
I would say that exists least in Italy and in the Mediterranean
countries, but they have it too, because naturally this wind blows
everywhere, even over to the Alps. The book says it: “Winds blow
southward.”
Before I give a short resume of the rest of the book, I want to say
what Miss Rump has found out about the name “Li.” With “Fo” it is
clear that the author means Buddha, but “Li” is a very great problem
because, as Miss Rump showed me, in the Chinese dictionary there are
innumerable “Li’s,” and it is not clear which the author means. The
most probable would seem to be “reason and reasonableness, order,”
because, you remember, Melchior represents the ego-figure torn
between those two opposites, so that Li—reason—would fit best with
the ego. Moreover, Melchior is a chemist, and until he became torn
between those two powers, he might really have been called the
cultivated, reasonable scientist. So he is reason, or consciousness, torn
between the opposites.
Miss Rump also informs me that the original meaning is quite
interesting, namely, the secret tracings which one finds in precious
stones, the tracings and patterns such as are to be found in an opal or
an onyx, in which there are frequently dark interior patterns. But how
does such a secret pattern becomes the basis for the word “Li”—
reason? One must naturally think in Chinese terms. You know that all
the cultural patterns in China were obtained, according to the myth,
from the meandering of the big Chinese rivers. They sketched the map,
and these patterns stand for the cultivated surface of the Chinese earth.
So for China, consciousness would be an awareness of the secret
pattern of nature, which is what I spoke of before. The Chinese, the
286

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

Eastern peoples— and, strangely enough, to a certain extent, the
Germanic people—are not interested in causal rationalism. Instead, the
natural tendency is toward becoming aware of the patterns of Tao, an
awareness created by divination of the unconscious, and, through that,
an awareness of synchronicity and of image analogies. Within this
mentality the secret patterns in a stone correspond to reason, but in the
book there is a fatal association because Fo and Li connect, and if you
write them together you arrive at “foli(e).” Since the outbreak of the
whole mass psychosis is predicted in this book, it is possible that the
author thought of this connection.
The next chapter is “The Transformation of Love.”
Melchior (now Li) walks over the sunburnt earth.
Bushes are in flower, and under his feet he feels the
burning earth. He feels elated and relaxed as he
walks through nature; every bush reaches out to him.
The waves of the river follow along beside him, and
as the sun sinks slowly, the river increases in size, as
does the noise of the waves until they take hold of
him, pressing on his feverish skin and lifting him off
the earth. Suddenly he hears a cry from the earth and
falls. Lips search for his mouth, and he realizes tat he
is embracing a delicate human being. He feels the
pressure of lips on his mouth and enfolding arms. He
feels skin against his own and hears the beating of a
heart, and realizes that he is embracing a woman.
“Who are you? And where do you come from?” he
asks.
Their embrace becomes more and more passionate.
He feels as if a white hall with columns in it rises
around them, but the columns dissolve into a blaze of
scent, and there are dark walls which glitter
fleetingly.
His body changes and is transformed, and he
realizes that he has a woman's body and is in a
Lesbian embrace with another woman who in turn
changes into a bronze giant with a broad chest and
strong bony arms, whose white teeth gleam between
black lips and whose eyes are unfathomable. One
change follows another for the giant has changed into
a being with a brown face and thick laughing lips, the
287

Marie-Louise von Franz

long fingers of whose hands caress him. Afterward
there is a Negress, then an Indian, and then a dark
girl. In ever-changing embraces he knows himself to
be in new rooms and with different bodies.
Sometimes he is a slave, kissed by an emperor,
sometimes a whore together with soldiers who smell
of blood, sometimes a priest in the scented bed of a
delicate woman.
Everything becomes dark, and he can no longer
distinguish anything. Then he finds himself between
temple walls, beside which stand motionless, sliteyed priests. He himself is a black-haired peasant,
tied together with a peasant woman on an altar,
looking around with tortured animal eyes and
bleeding from many wounds. The priests surround
him, their swords raised; Li cries out in nameless
terror and the swords strike. Li sees his blood spurt
and everything becomes a red mist. Out of the
moisture rises a primeval forest with giant trees and
man-high bushes. The roars of tigers come out of the
bushes. A panther digs his claws into Li’s flesh, and
he himself is a wild, spitting cat. Millions of gay
colored birds scream overhead. Li dissolves in
emptiness and knows no more.
He falls and falls. In one second he falls through all
the rooms through which he has passed. He hears
music. Through the endless forests of pillars move
crowds of dancers. A tremendous light breaks and
sunlight bursts through circles of blue. He awakes on
cushions of clouds to find Fo sleeping beside him,
breathing quietly. From his face comes a light, and his
lips twitch now and again as though in slight pain.
His body lies clear and white in the morning light
and is of such grace and charm that the tears flow
from Li’s eyes. Fo opens his eyes, sees Li, and takes
his face between his hands and kisses him on the
brow. They look round and see how out of all the
clouds, their comrades are awakening in the new
dawn.
Here you can see that the kingdom and power of Fo become as
288

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

dominating, strong and absolute as was the power of von Spät. Li is
now drawn into the earth and the principle of eternal transformation,
whose main drive is eros, or even sexuality in all its different forms.
The next chapter is entitles “Downfall.”
The boys raise their hands to the light in greeting, but
there is a rushing in the air and they cry that the
storm is coming. “The storm, the storm!” they cry.
“The kingdom is approaching! We’re home!”
“We are home!” repeats Fo. “We are diving into the
black springs to bloom afresh in the world!” Then
they sing a refrain which comes again and again in
the book: “Time sinks, Space disperses, Gestalt is
obliterated.”
The boys surround Fo and tremble. Fo lets his arms
sink and his limbs begin to shiver in pain. Soon the
whole group is shaken with pain. Their faces
suddenly seem age-old and faded, their eyes blind,
their skin flabby, and their hands thin and claylike.
All look at Fo, who seems bent under a heavy
burden. As in a fog, figures stream out of him, more
and more. They flutter around and disappear into
emptiness. Many figures also come out of the others,
who are twisting in pain. There are girls, old people,
ghosts, angels, wings, men in all kinds of dress, and
soldiers in uniform. Li sees hundreds of faces. He is
plagued by the dreadful pain and cries out and hears
how the others also cry. Their groans are mixed with
the sound of the forms in the air and the rising storm.
With every shadow that separates from the boys,
their bodies become more ethereal, their movements
weaker and their cries softer. They begin to glow with
a soft, inner light, but the train of forms never comes
to an end because they have to let out all those
formations
within
themselves—the
eternal
incarnations in their different forms—before they can
enter the kingdom. The boys grow weaker and
weaker, but their suffering is voluntary because it
means the approach of the kingdom. Their eyes fixed
on Fo, they do not notice how the faraway light of
their home become covered with mist and disappear,
289

Marie-Louise von Franz

do not feel the unfriendly air which surrounds them.
They are lamed by their own heaviness. Who had
them in his power? Who had approached to seize the
defenseless blind? A roll of thunder gives them a
terrible shock. The clouds in which they had floated
disappear and earth shows up beneath them. They
want to cry out but cannot. Almost soundlessly the
words drop from Fo’s lips: “That…is…not…the…
kingdom.”
With all their strength they try to pull themselves
together before the last of the forms can leave them,
but the swamp fastens on them and swallows them.
Fo’s eyelids droop over his eyes. Li sees how Fo falls
on the ground but is unable to move to help him.
Many colored birds circle around, fluttering hither
and thither, and in the middle of the group stage
figures appear. Silently they approach the stiffened
figures and lay their arms round the necks of the boys
to kiss them.
In the eyes of some of the boys appears a nameless
horror. Fear gives new power to their limbs, and they
thrust the strangers away, but the others let
themselves be kissed. As one of the strangers
approaches Fo, Li cries, “Wake up! Wake up!”
But Fo does not hear and the stranger bends over
him. Scarcely has he touched him when Fo springs
up, crying, “Hold back! Stop! Save yourselves! Hold
back!” The few boys who had defended themselves
make a terrific effort and recover. “To me! To me!”
Cries Fo to the other, but it is too late. The sacrifices,
sunk in a deathlike sleep, do not hear, and the
strangers breathe upon the floating, released
shadows, which dissolve in the air. Without looking
around, the strangers go, carrying their prisoners
with them, and as they move off their bodies are
transparent like glass.
Li finds himself on a wide, icy surface. “What is
happening?” he asks himself. “Since the enemy
barred the way to the kingdom, something has
happened to us. We are losing ourselves hopelessly in
290

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

a maze. We don’t know each other any more. Our
group is becoming scattered.”
Th sun shines red. A gust of wind comes and
sweeps away the snow. The ice is like a mirror, and Li
feels the freezing cold.
Here we have the other enantiodromia. Just as when Li was crowned
and had cried out that he wanted to go away and the boys had come
and carried him back, so now, when they are near the kingdom and
detaching from all projections—in the Eastern sense of the word,
getting free from karmic projections, from involvement in the world,
and turning positively to the kingdom, discovering the Self—then at
this moment the other pole again interferes and the pendulum swings
back again. They have missed the turning point. Once more it is a
meaningless enantiodromia.
Practically, this is best illustrated in the alternating states of
schizophrenics, for there are moments when they are completely filled
with the collective unconscious in the form of constant transformation.
They may even claim that they are God, or Jesus, or the Tree of Life, or
the gold and silver island. They may say, “I and Naples have to give
macaroni to the whole word,” for that is the kind of speech which is
made at such a time. In that form the person is caught in the collective
unconscious, in eternal transformation. But if it is a schizophrenic
episode that has something fatal in it, there is fragmented rationalism
in the material, for just as they say, “I am Jesus Christ, I am the World
Tree,” which is understandable, they go on, “I and Naples must
provide the world with macaroni,” which brings in absolute banality,
a fragmented part of the outer-ordinary, which disturbs the harmony
of this manifestation of the collective unconscious. Schizophrenic
material can at once be recognized, for fragments of intellectual
banalities are inseminated into very important material.
You could say that in such material there are von Spät fragments,
that the glass kingdom is broken up and ground in with the collective
unconscious material. To say, “I and Naples must provide the world
with macaroni” is complete nonsense, but to say, “I am Christ and the
World Tree” is quite meaningful because in the Self we have a divine
source, and every Christian mystic must accept that with a grain of
salt. If one could sort out the material, the illness would not be fatal,
but if one pulls out of it with drugs, without sorting the grains, he falls
into a rigid normality typical of the post-psychotic state. People
become rigid, normal and highly intellectual. They totally condemn
291

Marie-Louise von Franz

everything they had experienced, saying that they do not want to talk
about it. They repress it and carry on in the rigid normality of
established reason, which is generally the standard of the collective
conscious and intellectually something very cheap. In both cases two
things are lacking: first, the possibility of realizing the reality of the
psyche, for the schizophrenic when he is in this state takes the
archetypes and the inner world as being completely real, which is why
he thinks he is Jesus Christ. But he does not say that with the nuance of
the mystic; he means it quite literally, for he will say that he is Jesus
Christ and therefore is not going to his office tomorrow. This shows
that he does not understand it on the level of soul, on the inner place,
but takes it literally and concretely. In my experience, the greatest fight
one has in getting a schizophrenic out is to make him understand the
symbolic level of interpretation, for he insists on the thing being
concrete, and in that way introduces a strange rationalism and
materialism into his madness. He does not see that there is a reality of
the psyche. He cannot accept the hypothesis of psychic reality as
opposed to outer physical reality. He mixes the two up, which accounts
for the nonsense. When such people snap into the von Spät they are
rational, but again do not recognize the reality of the psyche.
The other thing which is lacking is the feeling function, that is, the
possibility of assessing values correctly. Jung tells the story of a
schizophrenic patient of his who from time to time stopped to listen to
something. He had a great difficulty in finding out what she was doing
when she broke off like that, but after a long time she confessed that at
such times she was telephoning to the Virgin Mary—just quickly
getting her opinion! At such times the patient was inaccessible because
there was someone else on the line, so to speak! Now if you had a
mystical experience of the Virgin Mary, you would be completely
overwhelmed. People who have had such inner experiences remain
shaken for days afterward. This is a usual reaction to an overwhelming
religious experience, but it is typical for a schizophrenic to say, “Hullo!
Oh yes! The Virgin Mary? Okay,” so that either you believe nothing of
it, or you are horribly shocked. In that case the values are lacking. If
people are raving, everything is said in the same tone, whether they
are Jesus Christ or delivering macaroni. The cheapest banalities and
the deepest religious material are interspersed without evaluation
That is why the story of Amor and Psyche is very meaningful.
Psyche, like Cinderella, must discriminate between the different grains,
separating the good from the bad; it is a function of the psyche to
292

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

discriminate values. If the anima is lost, feeling is lost, and that
happens often in schizophrenia. As soon as feeling has gone and
contact with the anima in a man has gone, then there is this picture.
When many people get into such a state, there is a mass psychosis as
we have already had and may possibly have again.
Now Li is caught in the ice and finds himself among
the ghosts of the dead. He sees his dead father,
Henriette Karlsen, and Otto von Lobe once more. He
feels cold and lost and does not know where he is
and wanders about, and we see that he is slowly
moving back again to the north and to the ice pole of
von Spät. (You know that von Spät is associated with
ice and the north and that when the wind blows
southward Fo is approaching. Here naturally the cold
belongs to the land of the dead.)
He sees a horse and a white bird and Fo beside
him, and says to Fo, “Now let’s go.” They jump onto
a black horse and ride off, but part of him feels
doubtful and cheated—something is uncanny—but
Fo hurries him on and they get into a boat. In the
same moment, with no preceding dawn, the sun rises
and Li looks into the eyes of the steersman and sees
von Spät. He gives a cry and everything goes dark.
Von Spät had taken on the appearance of Fo and tricked him into the
boat. It is again an enantiodromia, but this time one factor comes near
consciousness, namely, that von Spät and Fo are two aspects of the
same thing—each is secretly the other. This is something one always
finds in extreme psychological opposites, for at the turning point the
two are one. It is the Tai-gi-tu of Chinese philosophy: the germ of the
opposite is always in the black or in the white.
The next chapter is called “The Return.” It opens in a lunatic asylum
where people walk up and down in the garden.
One of the women has the beard of her late husband
in a glass frame, and she asks the warden and
everybody else to bring him back to life. Among the
madmen is a sad-looking old man whom we can
recognize as Melchior. (When he went into the boat,
Melchior probably died and in a reincarnation
arrived in a lunatic asylum. There is a description of
the way the people in the asylum sing and fight with
293

Marie-Louise von Franz

each other, all of which we have to skip.) Another old
man, a bald-headed paranoiac, walks up to Melchior
and says, “Listen quietly to me for once. We must not
continue to misunderstand each other. Why do you
always spy on me? That is senseless!”
“I don’t,” says the other.
“Yes, you do, I know you do, I can feel it. You have
done so from the first day you came here, but let’s not
speak of that. I am the Emperor, as you know, but I
don’t want to be acknowledged as such. I live in a
thousand forms, but you knew me at once. I also
know who you are. You are a great man, a great
Master. I will not mention names but I know you.
Why should we live with enmity? We could unite.
Let’s divide up—you take the south and I will take
the northern part of the earth (the two poles). I am
even ready to give you a part of my share, for I will
admit that in the south people are less intelligent, but
that part is easier to rule. Let us join up! I will accept
any proposition you care to make. Or, perhaps, you
would like the north? Take it!I will take the south. I
don’t mind! The south is quite enough for me; that
doesn’t matter. The main thing is that you don’t
persecute me any more! Let’s unite! It is a high time,
for otherwise everything will grow over our heads.
We must destroy mankind before there are too many,
and we must do it quickly before they notice
anything, for otherwise they will stop us. We want to
bring Paradise on earth again, for the world has
become too ugly. We will save a few women so that
by them we can generate new human beings. But be
careful, for God’s sake! Tell nobody! We must keep it
all a secret. Will you do it?”
He stretches out his hand, but the other old man,
Melchior, answers, “I don’t know what you mean!
The bald-headed man says, “Don’t you want to do
it? Do you want it all for yourself? As! Now I know!
You want to kill me! But look out for yourself! I am
watching! I know! I know!” He looks round
everywhere and sees in the distance a white figure
294

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

and runs away screaming.
The white figure, who is the doctor, approaches
Melchior and asks how he is. Melchior asks to be set
free. The doctor answers that he knows he is
completely cured, that the wonderful chemical
experiments he has performed there fully establish
that. “And I shall not try to rid of you of your fixed
idea that you are the Dr. Melchior von Lindenhuis of
Schimmelberg who disappeared a hundred years ago.
I think it is impossible to get you away from that
idea, but the wild fantasies you had a year ago when
you were found in a boat drifting about on the open
sea have left you. However, you still cannot
remember your real name, so in order to make it easy
for you with the authorities I will request that you
may be allowed to use that name, and then you can
continue your courses at the University and live a
normal life again.”
Three days later Melchior is set free.
This is a fatal turn, because, as you see, though
veiled with madness, the other half—the shadow, the
bald-headed old man—has tried to unite the
opposites. It is a last-minute attempt in the lunatic
asylum to unite them, to bring together the two sides
—the southern and the northern half of the world, Fo
and von Spät—to recognize the opposites and realize
that they are two aspects of one and the same thing.
But then it is mixed up with megalomanic ideas of
destroying the whole world and creating a new race.
As you know, the Herrenrasse was one of the
fantasies of the Nazi regime: all other people were to
be destroyed quickly because of overpopulation (a
part of the trouble that we are in at present) and a
new race created. The proposition of the bald-headed
man shows a strange mixture of constructive
tendencies (the union of the opposites) and of
megalomanic destructive fantasies. The union of the
opposites does not succeed, and Melchior regressed
into rational normality once more. If we relate it to
the author, he must have been near complete
295

Marie-Louise von Franz

madness, in which he could have realized the
problem of the opposites, but instead he switches into
the one-sidedness of his conscious standpoint. So
Melchior is released from the asylum, because a
professor at the University, and is once more
successful in a boring way, just as at the beginning of
the book.
One afternoon on his way home, he sees a young
man in the street who has the typical beauty of the
Ephebi and whose whole appearance attracts him. He
hurries, and as he passes looks at the man and then
lifts his hat and introduces himself. The young man
looks astonished but he says he is Walter Mahr (the
“Mar”, that is, nightmare, and “mare,” the female
horse). Lindenhuis explains that he had the
impression that he had seen him somewhere before,
but the young man replies that he does know know
how that could be, that he was born and grew up in
that town from which he has never been away, and
that Lindenhuis has only lived there for three years.
But they are now standing at the door of
Lindenhuis’s flat, and he begs the young man to
come in for a few minutes. There, Mahr confesses that
as a boy he had often dream of a face like Melchior’s,
though much younger. “Yes,” Melchior interrupts,
“one dreams many things, and I may well have
dreamed of you.”
”I dreamed,” Mahr continues, “that the face looked
in at the window and called me, and the voice was
also like yours. And once, another sat on the edge of
my bed and said I should follow him and let myself
be crucified.”
Melchior’s excitement grows as Mahr talks, and he
says everything has become confused to him and that
he cannot remember. He mutters to himself about
that the cross and streaming blood, and then tries to
fire Mahr with the idea or their going off together.
Mahr looks at him and then seizes his hand and
kisses it and says he will come. Lindenhuis tell him to
go now but to come again the next day and to get
296

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

ready to wander.
When Mahr has gone, Melchior sits thinking for a
while. Then he undresses and looks in the mirror at
the young beauty of his body and wonders what his
bald head is doing on such a body. Then he dresses
again and sits down at his desk to write, but it occurs
to him that there is no sense in doing that work any
more. For the first time he goes out into the street and
into a coffee house, where he meets a friend. They
talk of the fête being held in commemoration of the
big revolution a hundred years ago in
Stuhlbrestenburg, of the scenes in the street and the
killing of the king in the theater. Melchior interrupts,
saying he is tired and must go home. In the street he
thinks he hears steps. The streets, the lamps, the
heavens and the stars, all seem strange, and again he
hears steps keeping pace with his own. Without
noticing it he breaks into a song in which he is joined
by an invisible choir. The singing gets louder; pipes,
drums and cymbals play a march, and he sees himself
entering a city all lit up and he himself is riding a
white horse. At the windows and on the balconies of
the palace are veiled women and girls, and as he
reaches the middle of the square they let their veils
fall and stand there naked, throwing roses. A door
opens before Melchior, boys hold the bridle of the
horse, and Melchior gets down—and finds himself in
an empty street standing in front of his own door.
He cannot take another step; his knees give way
and he falls down. Lying in the snow, he cries until he
cannot cry any more. After a while he gets up and
goes up the steps to the house door, but as he puts the
key in the door, he shrinks back; it is as though the
door were warning him. He hesitates and thinks of
going back to the coffee house to wait there for the
morning, but when he remembers all the empty
streets and his tiredness he cannot, so he overcomes
his horror. On the stair he stands in the dark,
listening, and before his own door he almost turns
away again—it seems so strange and frightening. In
297

Marie-Louise von Franz

his flat he hurries to his room, strikes a light, and lets
the match fall, feeling that a stranger is there. He then
clearly hears the breathing of the sleeper and thinks
he recognizes it. At last he lights a candle. In the
armchair he sees a sleeping man with fair, wavy
locks. Melchior looks at the sleeper and recognizes
von Spät. At that moment the fog in his memory
departs him and he remembers everything that
happened.
“Now,” he thinks, “now I have him in my power,
now I am the master. I am awake and he believes me
to be powerless. I shall call the boys and they will tie
him up.” He looks at von Spät and sees the morbid,
divine face, which still fascinates him, but he shakes
off the temptation and cries out, “I want to go away!”
Nothing happens. He raises his arm and cries
again, “I want to go away!” But still there is silence
and nobody comes. For a third time he cries out, but
it is useless. He lets his arms drop and knows that he
is alone, that the boys are in the power of the
strangers.
“It is all over,” thinks Melchior, and feels terribly
tired. He looks at Ulrich again, who is still sleeping.
He is afraid to look at his eyes and hears him speak.
Carefully, without undressing, he lies down on his
bed and immediately falls asleep.
He dreams that the glass men have overcome
everything and that the boys are destroyed. It is a
long dream. At the end of it he hears his name called
and comes face to face with Ulrich. He draws a knife
and dashes at him, and like a flash carves across his
breast. Ulrich cries out, “Melchior!” Melchior wakes
up and sees Ulrich standing there, a lighted candle in
his hand. It is still night.
“The world is mine,” says Ulrich. “It was useless to
call the boys. They could not hear you. They are only
reflections in a mirror.”
“I do not belong to you!” cries Melchior. “My will
is my own!”
“I will break it, as I have broken others,” says
298

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

Ulrich calmly. “Come with me, and I will show you
the last act.”
“The game never ends,” says Melchior.
“Come with me,” repeats Ulrich, “and look!”
Out on the street the snowstorm has intensified.
They walk for over an hour, the snow blowing in
their faces. At last they come to a dark alley and a
dilapidated house where an oil lantern burns. Ulrich
halts. Over the entrance are the words: “World Stage
Radium.”
“We have arrived,” says Ulrich, who had not
spoken all the way, and he knocks with his stick three
times on the door. A dwarf looks out. “You are late,”
he says. “The audience has all gone. Nobody wants to
see it, but we are continuing the play to the end. The
last act is just about to begin.” He leads them through
old passages with cracks in the walls, until they come
to a door in the wall through which he begs them
enter and enjoy themselves. They sit down and look
into the empty auditorium, dark except for an
occasional lantern in whose light a couple of forms
move about.
“It’s a good place,” says Ulrich. “One can see the
actors from an angle which prevents one from taking
the play too tragically.”
“What does it matter to us? What shall I see here?”
says Melchior.
“The last act,” repeats Ulrich.
A bell rings and the curtain flies up. There on the
stage Melchior sees the boys and Mr. von Spät—
doubled on the stage. Melchior sees the same streets
and that he had seen in a dream an hour or two
before, the transparent inhabitants, and the
immovable faces. And this time he knows who they
are, for he recognizes the boys.
Ulrich gets up and then sits down on a rather
higher chair behind Melchior. He pulls out some
large opera glasses and, supporting his elbows on
Melchior’s shoulders, looks at the stage over
Melchior’s head. The boys dance round Ulrich’s
299

Marie-Louise von Franz

mirrored form, singing, “Time sinks away, Space
vanishes, Gestalt disappears.” It is Fo’s voice.
Melchior starts to jump up but Ulrich’s elbows press
heavily on his shoulders and hold him down. The
dancing boys separate into pairs. An immense
gateway rises up in the background. The last smile is
stiffening on the boys’ lips, their eyes are shut in deep
sleep, and the eyes of Ulrich’s double also close
slowly.
Melchior feels the pressure of Ulrich’s elbows
lessen. He turns and sees that he has fallen asleep. He
shakes off his elbows and forces away the sleep he
feels creeping over him. Strange words pour from his
lips and re-echo in the place.
Then he sees a new figure on the stage and
recognizes himself. He sees the figure hurry to Fo and
shake him, and sees how Fo slowly opens his eyes
and springs up. He hears himself cry, “He is asleep!
Now is the time!” They dash at Ulrich’s image with
shining knives. At the same instant Ulrich falls
lifeless to the ground. Melchior sees himself on the
stage with Fo and sees how they hurry away.
The wind seizes Melchior and carries him.
Snowflakes fall on his face, a pale light is dawning.
He is along on the snowy streets. Gradually the
snowstorm diminishes, and the sun tries to break
through the clouds. Melchior feels his strength
leaving him. He is so weak he can hardly move.
Powerless, he drops in the snow and looks into the
distance.
“The circles are closing,” he whispers. “Everything
is fulfilled. My shadow has freed your shadow. The
enemy is destroyed. Where on the wide earth are
you? Beyond the great seas which divide us I hear
your voice. Day and night, night and day, you
wander over the plains and climb the high
mountains. Golden ships with red sails carry you
across the sea. Swarms of birds surround your head.
Over wild roads you come nearer and nearer. In time
it will be morning, and you will appear before me
300

Problem of the Puer Aeternus

naked and glowing, stars in your hair, and your cool
lips will kiss my beating heart. The earth will no
longer be dumb. Your words will call to all life, your
breath come from everybody, your love blossom from
every heart. The cross will be raised. The newly risen
will shed their blood into the veins of the world and
will transform from one form into another. They new
play begins. Grapes darken and await you. See, how
we rest, breathing in happiness. Everything is still.
Come to us in foliage of night in naked conflagration,
young flame, singing flame, Master and Child.”
At the end of this hymn like prayer he gets up and
stretches his limbs. Stumbling through the snow, he
thinks he sees a drop of blood against the white. He
looks closer and sees it is a rose leaf. A few steps
further on is another and another; the whole way is
strewn with them, and in the snow is the trace of
delicate bare feet. He follows the tracks, which lead
higher and higher. The fog thickens round him and
the earth disappears. Everything is white and grows
whiter and whiter; only the rose leaves glow, blood
red, and draw him on. Far ahead in the fog he sees
the back of a figure. His weakness disappears. He
feels nothing and knows nothing but the form in
front of him. The sun comes out. The fog suddenly
lifts. On a peak stands Fo in a glow of light, roses in
his hair, his flaming arms wide.
The tired wanderer falls on his knees. “The
kingdom!” he stammers. “The kingdom without
space!” and dies.
Again there was an enantiodromia. First Von Spät had won by taking
Melchior in the boat, and then a hundred years later Melchior is in the
lunatic asylum (because as soon as you are in the kingdom of
intellectual reason, anything experienced at the opposite end, in Fo’s
realm—seems to be sheer madness). Melchior escapes from the
asylum, and on the stage, when they stab von Spät, Fo wins again, this
time in this world. Fo remain victorious: he find the kingdom at last,
but he leaves his body behind. Von Spät gets the body. He himself is a
dead old man, which means that the problem is not solved but it is
again postponed, because if a solution is described as taking place after
301

Marie-Louise von Franz

death, it means that the conscious means for realization have not yet
been found in this reality. That is why in Christianity victory over evil
and the union of the opposites is projected into the time after the Day
of Judgement. Paradise comes after death. In Faust, Faust finds
redemption after death, and in The Kingdom Without Space the solution
is again projected into the afterlife. Here it is clear that the bridge to
realization has not been found because in the fight the reality of the
psyche is not realized. It is all fought in the projection—intellect
against the archaic reality of the unconscious—but having no name for
it and not seeing its reality, the author mixes psychic reality with
concrete reality.
This is also the ominous background of our present-day problem, in
connection with which I would like to quote saying Rabelais to which
Jung drew my attention: La verité dans sa matière brute est plus fausse que
la faux (Truth in its prima materia, in its first appearance, is falser than
falseness itself.) And that is very true of what we have just
experienced. But in spite of it all, these are attempts to bring forth a
new creative religious attitude and also a renewal of cultural creativity
— which can only manifest in a psychological and individual form.
The trouble is that it comes up with such a disgustingly false political
twist that it is more false than falseness itself. In spite of this, however,
we must turn toward it and discriminate the seeds in it. Otherwise we
are stuck, forever building light, “rosy-colored” buildings upon burntout ruins.

302

